I was about say somthing: where did I leaue?
  Reynol. At closes in the consequence:
At friend, or so, and Gentleman

   Polon. At closes in the consequence, I marry,
He closes with you thus. I know the Gentleman,
I saw him yesterday, or tother day;
Or then or then, with such and such; and as you say,
There was he gaming, there o'retooke in's Rouse,
There falling out at Tennis; or perchance,
I saw him enter such a house of saile;
Videlicet, a Brothell, or so forth. See you now;
Your bait of falshood, takes this Cape of truth;
And thus doe we of wisedome and of reach
With windlesses, and with assaies of Bias,
By indirections finde directions out:
So by my former Lecture and aduice
Shall you my Sonne; you haue me, haue you not?
  Reynol. My Lord I haue

   Polon. God buy you; fare you well

   Reynol. Good my Lord

   Polon. Obserue his inclination in your selfe

   Reynol. I shall my Lord

   Polon. And let him plye his Musicke

   Reynol. Well, my Lord.
Enter.

Enter Ophelia.

  Polon. Farewell:
How now Ophelia, what's the matter?
  Ophe. Alas my Lord, I haue beene so affrighted

   Polon. With what, in the name of Heauen?
  Ophe. My Lord, as I was sowing in my Chamber,
Lord Hamlet with his doublet all vnbrac'd,
No hat vpon his head, his stockings foul'd,
Vngartred, and downe giued to his Anckle,
Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,
And with a looke so pitious in purport,
As if he had been loosed out of hell,
To speake of horrors: he comes before me

   Polon. Mad for thy Loue?
  Ophe. My Lord, I doe not know: but truly I do feare it

   Polon. What said he?
  Ophe. He tooke me by the wrist, and held me hard;
Then goes he to the length of all his arme;
And with his other hand thus o're his brow,
He fals to such perusall of my face,
As he would draw it. Long staid he so,
At last, a little shaking of mine Arme:
And thrice his head thus wauing vp and downe;
He rais'd a sigh, so pittious and profound,
That it did seeme to shatter all his bulke,
And end his being. That done, he lets me goe,
And with his head ouer his shoulders turn'd,
He seem'd to finde his way without his eyes,
For out adores he went without their helpe;
And to the last, bended their light on me

   Polon. Goe with me, I will goe seeke the King,
This is the very extasie of Loue,
Whose violent property foredoes it selfe,
And leads the will to desperate Vndertakings,
As oft as any passion vnder Heauen,
That does afflict our Natures. I am sorrie,
What haue you giuen him any hard words of late?
  Ophe. No my good Lord: but as you did command,
I did repell his Letters, and deny'de
His accesse to me

   Pol. That hath made him mad.
I am sorrie that with better speed and iudgement
I had not quoted him. I feare he did but trifle,
And meant to wracke thee: but beshrew my iealousie:
It seemes it is as proper to our Age,
To cast beyond our selues in our Opinions,
As it is common for the yonger sort
To lacke discretion. Come, go we to the King,
This must be knowne, being kept close might moue
More greefe to hide, then hate to vtter loue.

Exeunt.


Scena Secunda.

Enter King, Queene, Rosincrane, and Guildensterne Cum alijs.

  King. Welcome deere Rosincrance and Guildensterne.
Moreouer, that we much did long to see you,
The neede we haue to vse you, did prouoke
Our hastie sending. Something haue you heard
Of Hamlets transformation: so I call it,
Since not th' exterior, nor the inward man
Resembles that it was. What it should bee
More then his Fathers death, that thus hath put him
So much from th' vnderstanding of himselfe,
I cannot deeme of. I intreat you both,
That being of so young dayes brought vp with him:
And since so Neighbour'd to his youth, and humour,
That you vouchsafe your rest heere in our Court
Some little time: so by your Companies
To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather
So much as from Occasions you may gleane,
That open'd lies within our remedie

   Qu. Good Gentlemen, he hath much talk'd of you,
And sure I am, two men there are not liuing,
To whom he more adheres. If it will please you
To shew vs so much Gentrie, and good will,
As to expend your time with vs a-while,
For the supply and profit of our Hope,
Your Visitation shall receiue such thankes
As fits a Kings remembrance

   Rosin. Both your Maiesties
Might by the Soueraigne power you haue of vs,
Put your dread pleasures, more into Command
Then to Entreatie

   Guil. We both obey,
And here giue vp our selues, in the full bent,
To lay our Seruices freely at your feete,
To be commanded

   King. Thankes Rosincrance, and gentle Guildensterne

   Qu. Thankes Guildensterne and gentle Rosincrance.
And I beseech you instantly to visit
My too much changed Sonne.
Go some of ye,
And bring the Gentlemen where Hamlet is

   Guil. Heauens make our presence and our practises
Pleasant and helpfull to him.
Enter.

  Queene. Amen.
Enter Polonius.

  Pol. Th' Ambassadors from Norwey, my good Lord,
Are ioyfully return'd

   King. Thou still hast bin the father of good Newes

   Pol. Haue I, my Lord? Assure you, my good Liege,
I hold my dutie, as I hold my Soule,
Both to my God, one to my gracious King:
And I do thinke, or else this braine of mine
Hunts not the traile of Policie, so sure
As I haue vs'd to do: that I haue found
The very cause of Hamlets Lunacie

   King. Oh speake of that, that I do long to heare

   Pol. Giue first admittance to th' Ambassadors,
My Newes shall be the Newes to that great Feast

   King. Thy selfe do grace to them, and bring them in.
He tels me my sweet Queene, that he hath found
The head and sourse of all your Sonnes distemper

   Qu. I doubt it is no other, but the maine,
His Fathers death, and our o're-hasty Marriage.
Enter Polonius, Voltumand, and Cornelius.

  King. Well, we shall sift him. Welcome good Frends:
Say Voltumand, what from our Brother Norwey?
  Volt. Most faire returne of Greetings, and Desires.
Vpon our first, he sent out to suppresse
His Nephewes Leuies, which to him appear'd
To be a preparation 'gainst the Poleak:
But better look'd into, he truly found
It was against your Highnesse, whereat greeued,
That so his Sicknesse, Age, and Impotence
Was falsely borne in hand, sends out Arrests
On Fortinbras, which he (in breefe) obeyes,
Receiues rebuke from Norwey: and in fine,
Makes Vow before his Vnkle, neuer more
To giue th' assay of Armes against your Maiestie.
Whereon old Norwey, ouercome with ioy,
Giues him three thousand Crownes in Annuall Fee,
And his Commission to imploy those Soldiers
So leuied as before, against the Poleak:
With an intreaty heerein further shewne,
That it might please you to giue quiet passe
Through your Dominions, for his Enterprize,
On such regards of safety and allowance,
As therein are set downe

   King. It likes vs well:
And at our more consider'd time wee'l read,
Answer, and thinke vpon this Businesse.
Meane time we thanke you, for your well-tooke Labour.
Go to your rest, at night wee'l Feast together.
Most welcome home.

Exit Ambass.

  Pol. This businesse is very well ended.
My Liege, and Madam, to expostulate
What Maiestie should be, what Dutie is,
Why day is day; night, night; and time is time,
Were nothing but to waste Night, Day, and Time.
Therefore, since Breuitie is the Soule of Wit,
And tediousnesse, the limbes and outward flourishes,
I will be breefe. Your Noble Sonne is mad:
Mad call I it; for to define true Madnesse,
What is't, but to be nothing else but mad.
But let that go

   Qu. More matter, with lesse Art

   Pol. Madam, I sweare I vse no Art at all:
That he is mad, 'tis true: 'Tis true 'tis pittie,
And pittie it is true: A foolish figure,
But farewell it: for I will vse no Art.
Mad let vs grant him then: and now remaines
That we finde out the cause of this effect,
Or rather say, the cause of this defect;
For this effect defectiue, comes by cause,
Thus it remaines, and the remainder thus. Perpend,
I haue a daughter: haue, whil'st she is mine,
Who in her Dutie and Obedience, marke,
Hath giuen me this: now gather, and surmise.

The Letter.

To the Celestiall, and my Soules Idoll, the most beautifed Ophelia.
That's an ill Phrase, a vilde Phrase, beautified is a vilde
Phrase: but you shall heare these in her excellent white
bosome, these

   Qu. Came this from Hamlet to her

   Pol. Good Madam stay awhile, I will be faithfull.
Doubt thou, the Starres are fire,
Doubt, that the Sunne doth moue:
Doubt Truth to be a Lier,
But neuer Doubt, I loue.
O deere Ophelia, I am ill at these Numbers: I haue not Art to
reckon my grones; but that I loue thee best, oh most Best beleeue
it. Adieu.
Thine euermore most deere Lady, whilst this
Machine is to him, Hamlet.
This in Obedience hath my daughter shew'd me:
And more aboue hath his soliciting,
As they fell out by Time, by Meanes, and Place,
All giuen to mine eare

   King. But how hath she receiu'd his Loue?
  Pol. What do you thinke of me?
  King. As of a man, faithfull and Honourable

   Pol. I wold faine proue so. But what might you think?
When I had seene this hot loue on the wing,
As I perceiued it, I must tell you that
Before my Daughter told me what might you
Or my deere Maiestie your Queene heere, think,
If I had playd the Deske or Table-booke,
Or giuen my heart a winking, mute and dumbe,
Or look'd vpon this Loue, with idle sight,
What might you thinke? No, I went round to worke,
And (my yong Mistris) thus I did bespeake
Lord Hamlet is a Prince out of thy Starre,
This must not be: and then, I Precepts gaue her,
That she should locke her selfe from his Resort,
Admit no Messengers, receiue no Tokens:
Which done, she tooke the Fruites of my Aduice,
And he repulsed. A short Tale to make,
Fell into a Sadnesse, then into a Fast,
Thence to a Watch, thence into a Weaknesse,
Thence to a Lightnesse, and by this declension
Into the Madnesse whereon now he raues,
And all we waile for

   King. Do you thinke 'tis this?
  Qu. It may be very likely

   Pol. Hath there bene such a time, I'de fain know that,
That I haue possitiuely said, 'tis so,
When it prou'd otherwise?
  King. Not that I know

   Pol. Take this from this; if this be otherwise,
If Circumstances leade me, I will finde
Where truth is hid, though it were hid indeede
Within the Center

   King. How may we try it further?
  Pol. You know sometimes
He walkes foure houres together, heere
In the Lobby

   Qu. So he ha's indeed

   Pol. At such a time Ile loose my Daughter to him,
Be you and I behinde an Arras then,
Marke the encounter: If he loue her not,
And be not from his reason falne thereon;
Let me be no Assistant for a State,
And keepe a Farme and Carters

   King. We will try it.
Enter Hamlet reading on a Booke.

  Qu. But looke where sadly the poore wretch
Comes reading

   Pol. Away I do beseech you, both away,
Ile boord him presently.

Exit King & Queen.

Oh giue me leaue. How does my good Lord Hamlet?
  Ham. Well, God-a-mercy

   Pol. Do you know me, my Lord?
  Ham. Excellent, excellent well: y'are a Fishmonger

   Pol. Not I my Lord

   Ham. Then I would you were so honest a man

   Pol. Honest, my Lord?
  Ham. I sir, to be honest as this world goes, is to bee
one man pick'd out of two thousand

   Pol. That's very true, my Lord

   Ham. For if the Sun breed Magots in a dead dogge,
being a good kissing Carrion-
Haue you a daughter?
  Pol. I haue my Lord

   Ham. Let her not walke i'thSunne: Conception is a
blessing, but not as your daughter may conceiue. Friend
looke too't

   Pol. How say you by that? Still harping on my daughter:
yet he knew me not at first; he said I was a Fishmonger:
he is farre gone, farre gone: and truly in my youth,
I suffred much extreamity for loue: very neere this. Ile
speake to him againe. What do you read my Lord?
  Ham. Words, words, words

   Pol. What is the matter, my Lord?
  Ham. Betweene who?
  Pol. I meane the matter you meane, my Lord

   Ham. Slanders Sir: for the Satyricall slaue saies here,
that old men haue gray Beards; that their faces are wrinkled;
their eyes purging thicke Amber, or Plum-Tree
Gumme: and that they haue a plentifull locke of Wit,
together with weake Hammes. All which Sir, though I
most powerfully, and potently beleeue; yet I holde it
not Honestie to haue it thus set downe: For you your
selfe Sir, should be old as I am, if like a Crab you could
go backward

   Pol. Though this be madnesse,
Yet there is Method in't: will you walke
Out of the ayre my Lord?
  Ham. Into my Graue?
  Pol. Indeed that is out o'th' Ayre:
How pregnant (sometimes) his Replies are?
A happinesse,
That often Madnesse hits on,
Which Reason and Sanitie could not
So prosperously be deliuer'd of.
I will leaue him,
And sodainely contriue the meanes of meeting
Betweene him, and my daughter.
My Honourable Lord, I will most humbly
Take my leaue of you

   Ham. You cannot Sir take from me any thing, that I
will more willingly part withall, except my life, my
life

   Polon. Fare you well my Lord

   Ham. These tedious old fooles

   Polon. You goe to seeke my Lord Hamlet; there
hee is.
Enter Rosincran and Guildensterne.

  Rosin. God saue you Sir

   Guild. Mine honour'd Lord?
  Rosin. My most deare Lord?
  Ham. My excellent good friends? How do'st thou
Guildensterne? Oh, Rosincrane; good Lads: How doe ye
both?
  Rosin. As the indifferent Children of the earth

   Guild. Happy, in that we are not ouer-happy: on Fortunes
Cap, we are not the very Button

   Ham. Nor the Soales of her Shoo?
  Rosin. Neither my Lord

   Ham. Then you liue about her waste, or in the middle
of her fauour?
  Guil. Faith, her priuates, we

   Ham. In the secret parts of Fortune? Oh, most true:
she is a Strumpet. What's the newes?
  Rosin. None my Lord; but that the World's growne
honest

   Ham. Then is Doomesday neere: But your newes is
not true. Let me question more in particular: what haue
you my good friends, deserued at the hands of Fortune,
that she sends you to Prison hither?
  Guil. Prison, my Lord?
  Ham. Denmark's a Prison

   Rosin. Then is the World one

   Ham. A goodly one, in which there are many Confines,
Wards, and Dungeons; Denmarke being one o'th'
worst

   Rosin. We thinke not so my Lord

   Ham. Why then 'tis none to you; for there is nothing
either good or bad, but thinking makes it so: to me it is
a prison

   Rosin. Why then your Ambition makes it one: 'tis
too narrow for your minde

   Ham. O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell, and
count my selfe a King of infinite space; were it not that
I haue bad dreames

   Guil. Which dreames indeed are Ambition: for the
very substance of the Ambitious, is meerely the shadow
of a Dreame

   Ham. A dreame it selfe is but a shadow

   Rosin. Truely, and I hold Ambition of so ayry and
light a quality, that it is but a shadowes shadow

   Ham. Then are our Beggers bodies; and our Monarchs
and out-stretcht Heroes the Beggers Shadowes:
shall wee to th' Court: for, by my fey I cannot reason?
  Both. Wee'l wait vpon you

   Ham. No such matter. I will not sort you with the
rest of my seruants: for to speake to you like an honest
man: I am most dreadfully attended; but in the beaten
way of friendship, What make you at Elsonower?
  Rosin. To visit you my Lord, no other occasion

   Ham. Begger that I am, I am euen poore in thankes;
but I thanke you: and sure deare friends my thanks
are too deare a halfepeny; were you not sent for? Is it
your owne inclining? Is it a free visitation? Come,
deale iustly with me: come, come; nay speake

   Guil. What should we say my Lord?
  Ham. Why any thing. But to the purpose; you were
sent for; and there is a kinde confession in your lookes;
which your modesties haue not craft enough to color,
I know the good King & Queene haue sent for you

   Rosin. To what end my Lord?
  Ham. That you must teach me: but let mee coniure
you by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy of
our youth, by the Obligation of our euer-preserued loue,
and by what more deare, a better proposer could charge
you withall; be euen and direct with me, whether you
were sent for or no

   Rosin. What say you?
  Ham. Nay then I haue an eye of you: if you loue me
hold not off

   Guil. My Lord, we were sent for

   Ham. I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation
preuent your discouery of your secricie to the King and
Queene: moult no feather, I haue of late, but wherefore
I know not, lost all my mirth, forgone all custome of exercise;
and indeed, it goes so heauenly with my disposition;
that this goodly frame the Earth, seemes to me a sterrill
Promontory; this most excellent Canopy the Ayre,
look you, this braue ore-hanging, this Maiesticall Roofe,
fretted with golden fire: why, it appeares no other thing
to mee, then a foule and pestilent congregation of vapours.
What a piece of worke is a man! how Noble in
Reason? how infinite in faculty? in forme and mouing
how expresse and admirable? in Action, how like an Angel?
in apprehension, how like a God? the beauty of the
world, the Parragon of Animals; and yet to me, what is
this Quintessence of Dust? Man delights not me; no,
nor Woman neither; though by your smiling you seeme
to say so

   Rosin. My Lord, there was no such stuffe in my
thoughts

   Ham. Why did you laugh, when I said, Man delights
not me?
  Rosin. To thinke, my Lord, if you delight not in Man,
what Lenton entertainment the Players shall receiue
from you: wee coated them on the way, and hither are
they comming to offer you Seruice

   Ham. He that playes the King shall be welcome; his
Maiesty shall haue Tribute of mee: the aduenturous
Knight shal vse his Foyle and Target: the Louer shall
not sigh gratis, the humorous man shall end his part in
peace: the Clowne shall make those laugh whose lungs
are tickled a'th' sere: and the Lady shall say her minde
freely; or the blanke Verse shall halt for't: what Players
are they?
  Rosin. Euen those you were wont to take delight in
the Tragedians of the City

   Ham. How chances it they trauaile? their residence
both in reputation and profit was better both
wayes

   Rosin. I thinke their Inhibition comes by the meanes
of the late Innouation?
  Ham. Doe they hold the same estimation they did
when I was in the City? Are they so follow'd?
  Rosin. No indeed, they are not

   Ham. How comes it? doe they grow rusty?
  Rosin. Nay, their indeauour keepes in the wonted
pace; But there is Sir an ayrie of Children, little
Yases, that crye out on the top of question; and
are most tyrannically clap't for't: these are now the
fashion, and so be-ratled the common Stages (so they
call them) that many wearing Rapiers, are affraide of
Goose-quils, and dare scarse come thither

   Ham. What are they Children? Who maintains 'em?
How are they escorted? Will they pursue the Quality no
longer then they can sing? Will they not say afterwards
if they should grow themselues to common Players (as
it is most like if their meanes are not better) their Writers
do them wrong, to make them exclaim against their
owne Succession

   Rosin. Faith there ha's bene much to do on both sides:
and the Nation holds it no sinne, to tarre them to Controuersie.
There was for a while, no mony bid for argument,
vnlesse the Poet and the Player went to Cuffes in
the Question

   Ham. Is't possible?
  Guild. Oh there ha's beene much throwing about of
Braines

   Ham. Do the Boyes carry it away?
  Rosin. I that they do my Lord. Hercules & his load too

   Ham. It is not strange: for mine Vnckle is King of
Denmarke, and those that would make mowes at him
while my Father liued; giue twenty, forty, an hundred
Ducates a peece, for his picture in Little. There is something
in this more then Naturall, if Philosophie could
finde it out.

Flourish for the Players.

  Guil. There are the Players

   Ham. Gentlemen, you are welcom to Elsonower: your
hands, come: The appurtenance of Welcome, is Fashion
and Ceremony. Let me comply with you in the Garbe,
lest my extent to the Players (which I tell you must shew
fairely outward) should more appeare like entertainment
then yours. You are welcome: but my Vnckle Father,
and Aunt Mother are deceiu'd

   Guil. In what my deere Lord?
  Ham. I am but mad North, North-West: when the
Winde is Southerly, I know a Hawke from a Handsaw.
Enter Polonius.

  Pol. Well be with you Gentlemen

   Ham. Hearke you Guildensterne, and you too: at each
eare a hearer: that great Baby you see there, is not yet
out of his swathing clouts

   Rosin. Happily he's the second time come to them: for
they say, an old man is twice a childe

   Ham. I will Prophesie. Hee comes to tell me of the
Players. Mark it, you say right Sir: for a Monday morning
'twas so indeed

   Pol. My Lord, I haue Newes to tell you

   Ham. My Lord, I haue Newes to tell you.
When Rossius an Actor in Rome-
  Pol. The Actors are come hither my Lord

   Ham. Buzze, buzze

   Pol. Vpon mine Honor

   Ham. Then can each Actor on his Asse-
  Polon. The best Actors in the world, either for Tragedie,
Comedie, Historie, Pastorall:
Pastoricall-Comicall-Historicall-Pastorall:
Tragicall-Historicall: Tragicall-Comicall-Historicall-Pastorall:
Scene indiuidible: or Poem
vnlimited. Seneca cannot be too heauy, nor Plautus
too light, for the law of Writ, and the Liberty. These are
the onely men

   Ham. O Iephta Iudge of Israel, what a Treasure had'st
thou?
  Pol. What a Treasure had he, my Lord?
  Ham. Why one faire Daughter, and no more,
The which he loued passing well

   Pol. Still on my Daughter

   Ham. Am I not i'th' right old Iephta?
  Polon. If you call me Iephta my Lord, I haue a daughter
that I loue passing well

   Ham. Nay that followes not

   Polon. What followes then, my Lord?
  Ha. Why, As by lot, God wot: and then you know, It
came to passe, as most like it was: The first rowe of the
Pons Chanson will shew you more. For looke where my
Abridgements come.
Enter foure or fiue Players.

Y'are welcome Masters, welcome all. I am glad to see
thee well: Welcome good Friends. Oh my olde Friend?
Thy face is valiant since I saw thee last: Com'st thou to
beard me in Denmarke? What, my yong Lady and Mistris?
Byrlady your Ladiship is neerer Heauen then when
I saw you last, by the altitude of a Choppine. Pray God
your voice like a peece of vncurrant Gold be not crack'd
within the ring. Masters, you are all welcome: wee'l e'ne
to't like French Faulconers, flie at any thing we see: wee'l
haue a Speech straight. Come giue vs a tast of your quality:
come, a passionate speech

   1.Play. What speech, my Lord?
  Ham. I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was
neuer Acted: or if it was, not aboue once, for the Play I
remember pleas'd not the Million, 'twas Cauiarie to the
Generall: but it was (as I receiu'd it, and others, whose
iudgement in such matters, cried in the top of mine) an
excellent Play; well digested in the Scoenes, set downe
with as much modestie, as cunning. I remember one said,
there was no Sallets in the lines, to make the matter sauory;
nor no matter in the phrase, that might indite the
Author of affectation, but cal'd it an honest method. One
cheefe Speech in it, I cheefely lou'd, 'twas Aeneas Tale
to Dido, and thereabout of it especially, where he speaks
of Priams slaughter. If it liue in your memory, begin at
this Line, let me see, let me see: The rugged Pyrrhus like
th'Hyrcanian Beast. It is not so: it begins with Pyrrhus
The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose Sable Armes
Blacke as his purpose, did the night resemble
When he lay couched in the Ominous Horse,
Hath now this dread and blacke Complexion smear'd
With Heraldry more dismall: Head to foote
Now is he to take Geulles, horridly Trick'd
With blood of Fathers, Mothers, Daughters, Sonnes,
Bak'd and impasted with the parching streets,
That lend a tyrannous, and damned light
To their vilde Murthers, roasted in wrath and fire,
And thus o're-sized with coagulate gore,
With eyes like Carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus
Olde Grandsire Priam seekes

   Pol. Fore God, my Lord, well spoken, with good accent,
and good discretion

   1.Player. Anon he findes him,
Striking too short at Greekes. His anticke Sword,
Rebellious to his Arme, lyes where it falles
Repugnant to command: vnequall match,
Pyrrhus at Priam driues, in Rage strikes wide:
But with the whiffe and winde of his fell Sword,
Th' vnnerued Father fals. Then senselesse Illium,
Seeming to feele his blow, with flaming top
Stoopes to his Bace, and with a hideous crash
Takes Prisoner Pyrrhus eare. For loe, his Sword
Which was declining on the Milkie head
Of Reuerend Priam, seem'd i'th' Ayre to sticke:
So as a painted Tyrant Pyrrhus stood,
And like a Newtrall to his will and matter, did nothing.
But as we often see against some storme,
A silence in the Heauens, the Racke stand still,
The bold windes speechlesse, and the Orbe below
As hush as death: Anon the dreadfull Thunder
Doth rend the Region. So after Pyrrhus pause,
A rowsed Vengeance sets him new a-worke,
And neuer did the Cyclops hammers fall
On Mars his Armours, forg'd for proofe Eterne,
With lesse remorse then Pyrrhus bleeding sword
Now falles on Priam.
Out, out, thou Strumpet-Fortune, all you Gods,
In generall Synod take away her power:
Breake all the Spokes and Fallies from her wheele,
And boule the round Naue downe the hill of Heauen,
As low as to the Fiends

   Pol. This is too long

   Ham. It shall to'th Barbars, with your beard. Prythee
say on: He's for a Iigge, or a tale of Baudry, or hee
sleepes. Say on; come to Hecuba

   1.Play. But who, O who, had seen the inobled Queen

   Ham. The inobled Queene?
  Pol. That's good: Inobled Queene is good

   1.Play. Run bare-foot vp and downe,
Threatning the flame
With Bisson Rheume: A clout about that head,
Where late the Diadem stood, and for a Robe
About her lanke and all ore-teamed Loines,
A blanket in th' Alarum of feare caught vp.
Who this had seene, with tongue in Venome steep'd,
'Gainst Fortunes State, would Treason haue pronounc'd?
But if the Gods themselues did see her then,
When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport
In mincing with his Sword her Husbands limbes,
The instant Burst of Clamour that she made
(Vnlesse things mortall moue them not at all)
Would haue made milche the Burning eyes of Heauen,
And passion in the Gods

   Pol. Looke where he ha's not turn'd his colour, and
ha's teares in's eyes. Pray you no more

   Ham. 'Tis well, Ile haue thee speake out the rest,
soone. Good my Lord, will you see the Players wel bestow'd.
Do ye heare, let them be well vs'd: for they are
the Abstracts and breefe Chronicles of the time. After
your death, you were better haue a bad Epitaph, then
their ill report while you liued

   Pol. My Lord, I will vse them according to their desart

   Ham. Gods bodykins man, better. Vse euerie man
after his desart, and who should scape whipping: vse
them after your own Honor and Dignity. The lesse they
deserue, the more merit is in your bountie. Take them
in

   Pol. Come sirs.

Exit Polon.

  Ham. Follow him Friends: wee'l heare a play to morrow.
Dost thou heare me old Friend, can you play the
murther of Gonzago?
  Play. I my Lord

   Ham. Wee'l ha't to morrow night. You could for a
need study a speech of some dosen or sixteene lines, which
I would set downe, and insert in't? Could ye not?
  Play. I my Lord

   Ham. Very well. Follow that Lord, and looke you
mock him not. My good Friends, Ile leaue you til night
you are welcome to Elsonower?
  Rosin. Good my Lord.

Exeunt.

Manet Hamlet.

  Ham. I so, God buy'ye: Now I am alone.
Oh what a Rogue and Pesant slaue am I?
Is it not monstrous that this Player heere,
But in a Fixion, in a dreame of Passion,
Could force his soule so to his whole conceit,
That from her working, all his visage warm'd;
Teares in his eyes, distraction in's Aspect,
A broken voyce, and his whole Function suiting
With Formes, to his Conceit? And all for nothing?
For Hecuba?
What's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,
That he should weepe for her? What would he doe,
Had he the Motiue and the Cue for passion
That I haue? He would drowne the Stage with teares,
And cleaue the generall eare with horrid speech:
Make mad the guilty, and apale the free,
Confound the ignorant, and amaze indeed,
The very faculty of Eyes and Eares. Yet I,
A dull and muddy-metled Rascall, peake
Like Iohn a-dreames, vnpregnant of my cause,
And can say nothing: No, not for a King,
Vpon whose property, and most deere life,
A damn'd defeate was made. Am I a Coward?
Who calles me Villaine? breakes my pate a-crosse?
Pluckes off my Beard, and blowes it in my face?
Tweakes me by'th' Nose? giues me the Lye i'th' Throate,
As deepe as to the Lungs? Who does me this?
Ha? Why I should take it: for it cannot be,
But I am Pigeon-Liuer'd, and lacke Gall
To make Oppression bitter, or ere this,
I should haue fatted all the Region Kites
With this Slaues Offall, bloudy: a Bawdy villaine,
Remorselesse, Treacherous, Letcherous, kindles villaine!
Oh Vengeance!
Who? What an Asse am I? I sure, this is most braue,
That I, the Sonne of the Deere murthered,
Prompted to my Reuenge by Heauen, and Hell,
Must (like a Whore) vnpacke my heart with words,
And fall a Cursing like a very Drab.
A Scullion? Fye vpon't: Foh. About my Braine.
I haue heard, that guilty Creatures sitting at a Play,
Haue by the very cunning of the Scoene,
Bene strooke so to the soule, that presently
They haue proclaim'd their Malefactions.
For Murther, though it haue no tongue, will speake
With most myraculous Organ. Ile haue these Players,
Play something like the murder of my Father,
Before mine Vnkle. Ile obserue his lookes,
Ile rent him to the quicke: If he but blench
I know my course. The Spirit that I haue seene
May be the Diuell, and the Diuel hath power
T' assume a pleasing shape, yea and perhaps
Out of my Weaknesse, and my Melancholly,
As he is very potent with such Spirits,
Abuses me to damne me. Ile haue grounds
More Relatiue then this: The Play's the thing,
Wherein Ile catch the Conscience of the King.

Exit

Enter King, Queene, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosincrance,
Guildenstern, and
Lords.

  King. And can you by no drift of circumstance
Get from him why he puts on this Confusion:
Grating so harshly all his dayes of quiet
With turbulent and dangerous Lunacy

   Rosin. He does confesse he feeles himselfe distracted,
But from what cause he will by no meanes speake

   Guil. Nor do we finde him forward to be sounded,
But with a crafty Madnesse keepes aloofe:
When we would bring him on to some Confession
Of his true state

   Qu. Did he receiue you well?
  Rosin. Most like a Gentleman

   Guild. But with much forcing of his disposition

   Rosin. Niggard of question, but of our demands
Most free in his reply

   Qu. Did you assay him to any pastime?
  Rosin. Madam, it so fell out, that certaine Players
We ore-wrought on the way: of these we told him,
And there did seeme in him a kinde of ioy
To heare of it: They are about the Court,
And (as I thinke) they haue already order
This night to play before him

   Pol. 'Tis most true:
And he beseech'd me to intreate your Maiesties
To heare, and see the matter

   King. With all my heart, and it doth much content me
To heare him so inclin'd. Good Gentlemen,
Giue him a further edge, and driue his purpose on
To these delights

   Rosin. We shall my Lord.

Exeunt.

  King. Sweet Gertrude leaue vs too,
For we haue closely sent for Hamlet hither,
That he, as 'twere by accident, may there
Affront Ophelia. Her Father, and my selfe (lawful espials)
Will so bestow our selues, that seeing vnseene
We may of their encounter frankely iudge,
And gather by him, as he is behaued,
If't be th' affliction of his loue, or no.
That thus he suffers for

   Qu. I shall obey you,
And for your part Ophelia, I do wish
That your good Beauties be the happy cause
Of Hamlets wildenesse: so shall I hope your Vertues
Will bring him to his wonted way againe,
To both your Honors

   Ophe. Madam, I wish it may

   Pol. Ophelia, walke you heere. Gracious so please ye
We will bestow our selues: Reade on this booke,
That shew of such an exercise may colour
Your lonelinesse. We are oft too blame in this,
'Tis too much prou'd, that with Deuotions visage,
And pious Action, we do surge o're
The diuell himselfe

   King. Oh 'tis true:
How smart a lash that speech doth giue my Conscience?
The Harlots Cheeke beautied with plaist'ring Art
Is not more vgly to the thing that helpes it,
Then is my deede, to my most painted word.
Oh heauie burthen!
  Pol. I heare him comming, let's withdraw my Lord.

Exeunt.

Enter Hamlet.

  Ham. To be, or not to be, that is the Question:
Whether 'tis Nobler in the minde to suffer
The Slings and Arrowes of outragious Fortune,
Or to take Armes against a Sea of troubles,
And by opposing end them: to dye, to sleepe
No more; and by a sleepe, to say we end
The Heart-ake, and the thousand Naturall shockes
That Flesh is heyre too? 'Tis a consummation
Deuoutly to be wish'd. To dye to sleepe,
To sleepe, perchance to Dreame; I, there's the rub,
For in that sleepe of death, what dreames may come,
When we haue shuffel'd off this mortall coile,
Must giue vs pawse. There's the respect
That makes Calamity of so long life:
For who would beare the Whips and Scornes of time,
The Oppressors wrong, the poore mans Contumely,
The pangs of dispriz'd Loue, the Lawes delay,
The insolence of Office, and the Spurnes
That patient merit of the vnworthy takes,
When he himselfe might his Quietus make
With a bare Bodkin? Who would these Fardles beare
To grunt and sweat vnder a weary life,
But that the dread of something after death,
The vndiscouered Countrey, from whose Borne
No Traueller returnes, Puzels the will,
And makes vs rather beare those illes we haue,
Then flye to others that we know not of.
Thus Conscience does make Cowards of vs all,
And thus the Natiue hew of Resolution
Is sicklied o're, with the pale cast of Thought,
And enterprizes of great pith and moment,
With this regard their Currants turne away,
And loose the name of Action. Soft you now,
The faire Ophelia? Nimph, in thy Orizons
Be all my sinnes remembred

   Ophe. Good my Lord,
How does your Honor for this many a day?
  Ham. I humbly thanke you: well, well, well

   Ophe. My Lord, I haue Remembrances of yours,
That I haue longed long to re-deliuer.
I pray you now, receiue them

   Ham. No, no, I neuer gaue you ought

   Ophe. My honor'd Lord, I know right well you did,
And with them words of so sweet breath compos'd,
As made the things more rich, then perfume left:
Take these againe, for to the Noble minde
Rich gifts wax poore, when giuers proue vnkinde.
There my Lord

   Ham. Ha, ha: Are you honest?
  Ophe. My Lord

   Ham. Are you faire?
  Ophe. What meanes your Lordship?
  Ham. That if you be honest and faire, your Honesty
should admit no discourse to your Beautie

   Ophe. Could Beautie my Lord, haue better Comerce
then your Honestie?
  Ham. I trulie: for the power of Beautie, will sooner
transforme Honestie from what is, to a Bawd, then the
force of Honestie can translate Beautie into his likenesse.
This was sometime a Paradox, but now the time giues it
proofe. I did loue you once

   Ophe. Indeed my Lord, you made me beleeue so

   Ham. You should not haue beleeued me. For vertue
cannot so innocculate our old stocke, but we shall rellish
of it. I loued you not

   Ophe. I was the more deceiued

   Ham. Get thee to a Nunnerie. Why would'st thou
be a breeder of Sinners? I am my selfe indifferent honest,
but yet I could accuse me of such things, that it were better
my Mother had not borne me. I am very prowd, reuengefull,
Ambitious, with more offences at my becke,
then I haue thoughts to put them in imagination, to giue
them shape, or time to acte them in. What should such
Fellowes as I do, crawling betweene Heauen and Earth.
We are arrant Knaues all, beleeue none of vs. Goe thy
wayes to a Nunnery. Where's your Father?
  Ophe. At home, my Lord

   Ham. Let the doores be shut vpon him, that he may
play the Foole no way, but in's owne house. Farewell

   Ophe. O helpe him, you sweet Heauens

   Ham. If thou doest Marry, Ile giue thee this Plague
for thy Dowrie. Be thou as chast as Ice, as pure as Snow,
thou shalt not escape Calumny. Get thee to a Nunnery.
Go, Farewell. Or if thou wilt needs Marry, marry a fool:
for Wise men know well enough, what monsters you
make of them. To a Nunnery go, and quickly too. Farwell

   Ophe. O heauenly Powers, restore him

   Ham. I haue heard of your pratlings too wel enough.
God has giuen you one pace, and you make your selfe another:
you gidge, you amble, and you lispe, and nickname
Gods creatures, and make your Wantonnesse, your Ignorance.
Go too, Ile no more on't, it hath made me mad.
I say, we will haue no more Marriages. Those that are
married already, all but one shall liue, the rest shall keep
as they are. To a Nunnery, go.

Exit Hamlet.

  Ophe. O what a Noble minde is heere o're-throwne?
The Courtiers, Soldiers, Schollers: Eye, tongue, sword,
Th' expectansie and Rose of the faire State,
The glasse of Fashion, and the mould of Forme,
Th' obseru'd of all Obseruers, quite, quite downe.
Haue I of Ladies most deiect and wretched,
That suck'd the Honie of his Musicke Vowes:
Now see that Noble, and most Soueraigne Reason,
Like sweet Bels iangled out of tune, and harsh,
That vnmatch'd Forme and Feature of blowne youth,
Blasted with extasie. Oh woe is me,
T'haue seene what I haue seene: see what I see.
Enter King, and Polonius.

  King. Loue? His affections do not that way tend,
Nor what he spake, though it lack'd Forme a little,
Was not like Madnesse. There's something in his soule?
O're which his Melancholly sits on brood,
And I do doubt the hatch, and the disclose
Will be some danger, which to preuent
I haue in quicke determination
Thus set it downe. He shall with speed to England
For the demand of our neglected Tribute:
Haply the Seas and Countries different
With variable Obiects, shall expell
This something setled matter in his heart:
Whereon his Braines still beating, puts him thus
From fashion of himselfe. What thinke you on't?
  Pol. It shall do well. But yet do I beleeue
The Origin and Commencement of this greefe
Sprung from neglected loue. How now Ophelia?
You neede not tell vs, what Lord Hamlet saide,
We heard it all. My Lord, do as you please,
But if you hold it fit after the Play,
Let his Queene Mother all alone intreat him
To shew his Greefes: let her be round with him,
And Ile be plac'd so, please you in the eare
Of all their Conference. If she finde him not,
To England send him: Or confine him where
Your wisedome best shall thinke

   King. It shall be so:
Madnesse in great Ones, must not vnwatch'd go.

Exeunt.

Enter Hamlet, and two or three of the Players.

  Ham. Speake the Speech I pray you, as I pronounc'd
it to you trippingly on the Tongue: But if you mouth it,
as many of your Players do, I had as liue the Town-Cryer
had spoke my Lines: Nor do not saw the Ayre too much
your hand thus, but vse all gently; for in the verie Torrent,
Tempest, and (as I say) the Whirle-winde of
Passion, you must acquire and beget a Temperance that
may giue it Smoothnesse. O it offends mee to the Soule,
to see a robustious Pery-wig-pated Fellow, teare a Passion
to tatters, to verie ragges, to split the eares of the
Groundlings: who (for the most part) are capeable of
nothing, but inexplicable dumbe shewes, & noise: I could
haue such a Fellow whipt for o're-doing Termagant: it
outHerod's Herod. Pray you auoid it

   Player. I warrant your Honor

   Ham. Be not too tame neyther: but let your owne
Discretion be your Tutor. Sute the Action to the Word,
the Word to the Action, with this speciall obseruance:
That you ore-stop not the modestie of Nature; for any
thing so ouer-done, is fro[m] the purpose of Playing, whose
end both at the first and now, was and is, to hold as 'twer
the Mirrour vp to Nature; to shew Vertue her owne
Feature, Scorne her owne Image, and the verie Age and
Bodie of the Time, his forme and pressure. Now, this
ouer-done, or come tardie off, though it make the vnskilfull
laugh, cannot but make the Iudicious greeue; The
censure of the which One, must in your allowance o'reway
a whole Theater of Others. Oh, there bee Players
that I haue seene Play, and heard others praise, and that
highly (not to speake it prophanely) that neyther hauing
the accent of Christians, nor the gate of Christian, Pagan,
or Norman, haue so strutted and bellowed, that I haue
thought some of Natures Iouerney-men had made men,
and not made them well, they imitated Humanity so abhominably

   Play. I hope we haue reform'd that indifferently with
vs, Sir

   Ham. O reforme it altogether. And let those that
play your Clownes, speake no more then is set downe for
them. For there be of them, that will themselues laugh,
to set on some quantitie of barren Spectators to laugh
too, though in the meane time, some necessary Question
of the Play be then to be considered: that's Villanous, &
shewes a most pittifull Ambition in the Foole that vses
it. Go make you readie.

Exit Players.

Enter Polonius, Rosincrance, and Guildensterne.

How now my Lord,
Will the King heare this peece of Worke?
  Pol. And the Queene too, and that presently

   Ham. Bid the Players make hast.

Exit Polonius.

Will you two helpe to hasten them?
  Both. We will my Lord.

Exeunt.

Enter Horatio.

  Ham. What hoa, Horatio?
  Hora. Heere sweet Lord, at your Seruice

   Ham. Horatio, thou art eene as iust a man
As ere my Conuersation coap'd withall

   Hora. O my deere Lord

   Ham. Nay, do not thinke I flatter:
For what aduancement may I hope from thee,
That no Reuennew hast, but thy good spirits
To feed & cloath thee. Why shold the poor be flatter'd?
No, let the Candied tongue, like absurd pompe,
And crooke the pregnant Hindges of the knee,
Where thrift may follow faining? Dost thou heare,
Since my deere Soule was Mistris of my choyse,
And could of men distinguish, her election
Hath seal'd thee for her selfe. For thou hast bene
As one in suffering all, that suffers nothing.
A man that Fortunes buffets, and Rewards
Hath 'tane with equall Thankes. And blest are those,
Whose Blood and Iudgement are so well co-mingled,
That they are not a Pipe for Fortunes finger.
To sound what stop she please. Giue me that man,
That is not Passions Slaue, and I will weare him
In my hearts Core. I, in my Heart of heart,
As I do thee. Something too much of this.
There is a Play to night to before the King.
One Scoene of it comes neere the Circumstance
Which I haue told thee, of my Fathers death.
I prythee, when thou see'st that Acte a-foot,
Euen with the verie Comment of my Soule
Obserue mine Vnkle: If his occulted guilt,
Do not it selfe vnkennell in one speech,
It is a damned Ghost that we haue seene:
And my Imaginations are as foule
As Vulcans Stythe. Giue him needfull note,
For I mine eyes will riuet to his Face:
And after we will both our iudgements ioyne,
To censure of his seeming

   Hora. Well my Lord.
If he steale ought the whil'st this Play is Playing,
And scape detecting, I will pay the Theft.
Enter King, Queene, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosincrance,
Guildensterne, and
other Lords attendant with his Guard carrying Torches. Danish
March. Sound
a Flourish.

  Ham. They are comming to the Play: I must be idle.
Get you a place

   King. How fares our Cosin Hamlet?
  Ham. Excellent Ifaith, of the Camelions dish: I eate
the Ayre promise-cramm'd, you cannot feed Capons so

   King. I haue nothing with this answer Hamlet, these
words are not mine

   Ham. No, nor mine. Now my Lord, you plaid once
i'th' Vniuersity, you say?
  Polon. That I did my Lord, and was accounted a good
Actor

   Ham. And what did you enact?
  Pol. I did enact Iulius Caesar, I was kill'd i'th' Capitol:
Brutus kill'd me

   Ham. It was a bruite part of him, to kill so Capitall a
Calfe there. Be the Players ready?
  Rosin. I my Lord, they stay vpon your patience

   Qu. Come hither my good Hamlet, sit by me

   Ha. No good Mother, here's Mettle more attractiue

   Pol. Oh ho, do you marke that?
  Ham. Ladie, shall I lye in your Lap?
  Ophe. No my Lord

   Ham. I meane, my Head vpon your Lap?
  Ophe. I my Lord

   Ham. Do you thinke I meant Country matters?
  Ophe. I thinke nothing, my Lord

   Ham. That's a faire thought to ly betweene Maids legs
  Ophe. What is my Lord?
  Ham. Nothing

   Ophe. You are merrie, my Lord?
  Ham. Who I?
  Ophe. I my Lord

   Ham. Oh God, your onely Iigge-maker: what should
a man do, but be merrie. For looke you how cheerefully
my Mother lookes, and my Father dyed within's two
Houres

   Ophe. Nay, 'tis twice two moneths, my Lord

   Ham. So long? Nay then let the Diuel weare blacke,
for Ile haue a suite of Sables. Oh Heauens! dye two moneths
ago, and not forgotten yet? Then there's hope, a
great mans Memorie, may out-liue his life halfe a yeare:
But byrlady he must builde Churches then: or else shall
he suffer not thinking on, with the Hoby-horsse, whose
Epitaph is, For o, For o, the Hoby-horse is forgot.

Hoboyes play. The dumbe shew enters.

Enter a King and Queene, very louingly; the Queene embracing
him. She
kneeles, and makes shew of Protestation vnto him. He takes her
vp, and
declines his head vpon her neck. Layes him downe vpon a Banke
of Flowers.
She seeing him a-sleepe, leaues him. Anon comes in a Fellow,
takes off his
Crowne, kisses it, and powres poyson in the Kings eares, and
Exits. The
Queene returnes, findes the King dead, and makes passionate
Action. The
Poysoner, with some two or three Mutes comes in againe, seeming
to lament
with her. The dead body is carried away: The Poysoner Wooes the
Queene with
Gifts, she seemes loath and vnwilling awhile, but in the end,
accepts his
loue.

Exeunt.

  Ophe. What meanes this, my Lord?
  Ham. Marry this is Miching Malicho, that meanes
Mischeefe

   Ophe. Belike this shew imports the Argument of the
Play?
  Ham. We shall know by these Fellowes: the Players
cannot keepe counsell, they'l tell all

   Ophe. Will they tell vs what this shew meant?
  Ham. I, or any shew that you'l shew him. Bee not
you asham'd to shew, hee'l not shame to tell you what it
meanes

   Ophe. You are naught, you are naught, Ile marke the
Play.
Enter Prologue.

For vs, and for our Tragedie,
Heere stooping to your Clemencie:
We begge your hearing Patientlie

   Ham. Is this a Prologue, or the Poesie of a Ring?
  Ophe. 'Tis briefe my Lord

   Ham. As Womans loue.
Enter King and his Queene.

  King. Full thirtie times hath Phoebus Cart gon round,
Neptunes salt Wash, and Tellus Orbed ground:
And thirtie dozen Moones with borrowed sheene,
About the World haue times twelue thirties beene,
Since loue our hearts, and Hymen did our hands
Vnite comutuall, in most sacred Bands

   Bap. So many iournies may the Sunne and Moone
Make vs againe count o're, ere loue be done.
But woe is me, you are so sicke of late,
So farre from cheere, and from your former state,
That I distrust you: yet though I distrust,
Discomfort you (my Lord) it nothing must:
For womens Feare and Loue, holds quantitie,
In neither ought, or in extremity:
Now what my loue is, proofe hath made you know,
And as my Loue is siz'd, my Feare is so

   King. Faith I must leaue thee Loue, and shortly too:
My operant Powers my Functions leaue to do:
And thou shalt liue in this faire world behinde,
Honour'd, belou'd, and haply, one as kinde.
For Husband shalt thou-
  Bap. Oh confound the rest:
Such Loue, must needs be Treason in my brest:
In second Husband, let me be accurst,
None wed the second, but who kill'd the first

   Ham. Wormwood, Wormwood

   Bapt. The instances that second Marriage moue,
Are base respects of Thrift, but none of Loue.
A second time, I kill my Husband dead,
When second Husband kisses me in Bed

   King. I do beleeue you. Think what now you speak:
But what we do determine, oft we breake:
Purpose is but the slaue to Memorie,
Of violent Birth, but poore validitie:
Which now like Fruite vnripe stickes on the Tree,
But fall vnshaken, when they mellow bee.
Most necessary 'tis, that we forget
To pay our selues, what to our selues is debt:
What to our selues in passion we propose,
The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.
The violence of other Greefe or Ioy,
Their owne ennactors with themselues destroy:
Where Ioy most Reuels, Greefe doth most lament;
Greefe ioyes, Ioy greeues on slender accident.
This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange
That euen our Loues should with our Fortunes change.
For 'tis a question left vs yet to proue,
Whether Loue lead Fortune, or else Fortune Loue.
The great man downe, you marke his fauourites flies,
The poore aduanc'd, makes Friends of Enemies:
And hitherto doth Loue on Fortune tend,
For who not needs, shall neuer lacke a Frend:
And who in want a hollow Friend doth try,
Directly seasons him his Enemie.
But orderly to end, where I begun,
Our Willes and Fates do so contrary run,
That our Deuices still are ouerthrowne,
Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our owne.
So thinke thou wilt no second Husband wed.
But die thy thoughts, when thy first Lord is dead

   Bap. Nor Earth to giue me food, nor Heauen light,
Sport and repose locke from me day and night:
Each opposite that blankes the face of ioy,
Meet what I would haue well, and it destroy:
Both heere, and hence, pursue me lasting strife,
If once a Widdow, euer I be Wife

   Ham. If she should breake it now

   King. 'Tis deepely sworne:
Sweet, leaue me heere a while,
My spirits grow dull, and faine I would beguile
The tedious day with sleepe

   Qu. Sleepe rocke thy Braine,

Sleepes

And neuer come mischance betweene vs twaine.

Exit

  Ham. Madam, how like you this Play?
  Qu. The Lady protests to much me thinkes

   Ham. Oh but shee'l keepe her word

   King. Haue you heard the Argument, is there no Offence
in't?
  Ham. No, no, they do but iest, poyson in iest, no Offence
i'th' world

   King. What do you call the Play?
  Ham. The Mouse-trap: Marry how? Tropically:
This Play is the Image of a murder done in Vienna: Gonzago
is the Dukes name, his wife Baptista: you shall see
anon: 'tis a knauish peece of worke: But what o'that?
Your Maiestie, and wee that haue free soules, it touches
vs not: let the gall'd iade winch: our withers are vnrung.
Enter Lucianus.

This is one Lucianus nephew to the King

   Ophe. You are a good Chorus, my Lord

   Ham. I could interpret betweene you and your loue:
if I could see the Puppets dallying

   Ophe. You are keene my Lord, you are keene

   Ham. It would cost you a groaning, to take off my
edge

   Ophe. Still better and worse

   Ham. So you mistake Husbands.
Begin Murderer. Pox, leaue thy damnable Faces, and
begin. Come, the croaking Rauen doth bellow for Reuenge

   Lucian. Thoughts blacke, hands apt,
Drugges fit, and Time agreeing:
Confederate season, else, no Creature seeing:
Thou mixture ranke, of Midnight Weeds collected,
With Hecats Ban, thrice blasted, thrice infected,
Thy naturall Magicke, and dire propertie,
On wholsome life, vsurpe immediately.

Powres the poyson in his eares.

  Ham. He poysons him i'th' Garden for's estate: His
name's Gonzago: the Story is extant and writ in choyce
Italian. You shall see anon how the Murtherer gets the
loue of Gonzago's wife

   Ophe. The King rises

   Ham. What, frighted with false fire

   Qu. How fares my Lord?
  Pol. Giue o're the Play

   King. Giue me some Light. Away

   All. Lights, Lights, Lights.

Exeunt.

Manet Hamlet & Horatio.

  Ham. Why let the strucken Deere go weepe,
The Hart vngalled play:
For some must watch, while some must sleepe;
So runnes the world away.
Would not this Sir, and a Forrest of Feathers, if the rest of
my Fortunes turne Turke with me; with two Prouinciall
Roses on my rac'd Shooes, get me a Fellowship in a crie
of Players sir

   Hor. Halfe a share

   Ham. A whole one I,
For thou dost know: Oh Damon deere,
This Realme dismantled was of Ioue himselfe,
And now reignes heere.
A verie verie Paiocke

   Hora. You might haue Rim'd

   Ham. Oh good Horatio, Ile take the Ghosts word for
a thousand pound. Did'st perceiue?
  Hora. Verie well my Lord

   Ham. Vpon the talke of the poysoning?
  Hora. I did verie well note him.
Enter Rosincrance and Guildensterne.

  Ham. Oh, ha? Come some Musick. Come y Recorders:
For if the King like not the Comedie,
Why then belike he likes it not perdie.
Come some Musicke

   Guild. Good my Lord, vouchsafe me a word with you

   Ham. Sir, a whole History

   Guild. The King, sir

   Ham. I sir, what of him?
  Guild. Is in his retyrement, maruellous distemper'd

   Ham. With drinke Sir?
  Guild. No my Lord, rather with choller

   Ham. Your wisedome should shew it selfe more richer,
to signifie this to his Doctor: for for me to put him
to his Purgation, would perhaps plundge him into farre
more Choller

   Guild. Good my Lord put your discourse into some
frame, and start not so wildely from my affayre

   Ham. I am tame Sir, pronounce

   Guild. The Queene your Mother, in most great affliction
of spirit, hath sent me to you

   Ham. You are welcome

   Guild. Nay, good my Lord, this courtesie is not of
the right breed. If it shall please you to make me a wholsome
answer, I will doe your Mothers command'ment:
if not, your pardon, and my returne shall bee the end of
my Businesse

   Ham. Sir, I cannot

   Guild. What, my Lord?
  Ham. Make you a wholsome answere: my wits diseas'd.
But sir, such answers as I can make, you shal command:
or rather you say, my Mother: therfore no more
but to the matter. My Mother you say

   Rosin. Then thus she sayes: your behauior hath stroke
her into amazement, and admiration

   Ham. Oh wonderfull Sonne, that can so astonish a
Mother. But is there no sequell at the heeles of this Mothers
admiration?
  Rosin. She desires to speake with you in her Closset,
ere you go to bed

   Ham. We shall obey, were she ten times our Mother.
Haue you any further Trade with vs?
  Rosin. My Lord, you once did loue me

   Ham. So I do still, by these pickers and stealers

   Rosin. Good my Lord, what is your cause of distemper?
You do freely barre the doore of your owne Libertie,
if you deny your greefes to your Friend

   Ham. Sir I lacke Aduancement

   Rosin. How can that be, when you haue the voyce of
the King himselfe, for your Succession in Denmarke?
  Ham. I, but while the grasse growes, the Prouerbe is
something musty.
Enter one with a Recorder.

O the Recorder. Let me see, to withdraw with you, why
do you go about to recouer the winde of mee, as if you
would driue me into a toyle?
  Guild. O my Lord, if my Dutie be too bold, my loue
is too vnmannerly

   Ham. I do not well vnderstand that. Will you play
vpon this Pipe?
  Guild. My Lord, I cannot

   Ham. I pray you

   Guild. Beleeue me, I cannot

   Ham. I do beseech you

   Guild. I know no touch of it, my Lord

   Ham. 'Tis as easie as lying: gouerne these Ventiges
with your finger and thumbe, giue it breath with your
mouth, and it will discourse most excellent Musicke.
Looke you, these are the stoppes

   Guild. But these cannot I command to any vtterance
of hermony, I haue not the skill

   Ham. Why looke you now, how vnworthy a thing
you make of me: you would play vpon mee; you would
seeme to know my stops: you would pluck out the heart
of my Mysterie; you would sound mee from my lowest
Note, to the top of my Compasse: and there is much Musicke,
excellent Voice, in this little Organe, yet cannot
you make it. Why do you thinke, that I am easier to bee
plaid on, then a Pipe? Call me what Instrument you will,
though you can fret me, you cannot play vpon me. God
blesse you Sir.
Enter Polonius.

  Polon. My Lord; the Queene would speak with you,
and presently

   Ham. Do you see that Clowd? that's almost in shape
like a Camell

   Polon. By'th' Masse, and it's like a Camell indeed

   Ham. Me thinkes it is like a Weazell

   Polon. It is back'd like a Weazell

   Ham. Or like a Whale?
  Polon. Verie like a Whale

   Ham. Then will I come to my Mother, by and by:
They foole me to the top of my bent.
I will come by and by

   Polon. I will say so.
Enter.

  Ham. By and by, is easily said. Leaue me Friends:
'Tis now the verie witching time of night,
When Churchyards yawne, and Hell it selfe breaths out
Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot blood,
And do such bitter businesse as the day
Would quake to looke on. Soft now, to my Mother:
Oh Heart, loose not thy Nature; let not euer
The Soule of Nero, enter this firme bosome:
Let me be cruell, not vnnaturall,
I will speake Daggers to her, but vse none:
My Tongue and Soule in this be Hypocrites.
How in my words someuer she be shent,
To giue them Seales, neuer my Soule consent.
Enter King, Rosincrance, and Guildensterne.

  King. I like him not, nor stands it safe with vs,
To let his madnesse range. Therefore prepare you,
I your Commission will forthwith dispatch,
And he to England shall along with you:
The termes of our estate, may not endure
Hazard so dangerous as doth hourely grow
Out of his Lunacies

   Guild. We will our selues prouide:
Most holie and Religious feare it is
To keepe those many many bodies safe
That liue and feede vpon your Maiestie

   Rosin. The single
And peculiar life is bound
With all the strength and Armour of the minde,
To keepe it selfe from noyance: but much more,
That Spirit, vpon whose spirit depends and rests
The liues of many, the cease of Maiestie
Dies not alone; but like a Gulfe doth draw
What's neere it, with it. It is a massie wheele
Fixt on the Somnet of the highest Mount.
To whose huge Spoakes, ten thousand lesser things
Are mortiz'd and adioyn'd: which when it falles,
Each small annexment, pettie consequence
Attends the boystrous Ruine. Neuer alone
Did the King sighe, but with a generall grone

   King. Arme you, I pray you to this speedie Voyage;
For we will Fetters put vpon this feare,
Which now goes too free-footed

   Both. We will haste vs.

Exeunt. Gent.

Enter Polonius.

  Pol. My Lord, he's going to his Mothers Closset:
Behinde the Arras Ile conuey my selfe
To heare the Processe. Ile warrant shee'l tax him home,
And as you said, and wisely was it said,
'Tis meete that some more audience then a Mother,
Since Nature makes them partiall, should o're-heare
The speech of vantage. Fare you well my Liege,
Ile call vpon you ere you go to bed,
And tell you what I know

   King. Thankes deere my Lord.
Oh my offence is ranke, it smels to heauen,
It hath the primall eldest curse vpon't,
A Brothers murther. Pray can I not,
Though inclination be as sharpe as will:
My stronger guilt, defeats my strong intent,
And like a man to double businesse bound,
I stand in pause where I shall first begin,
And both neglect; what if this cursed hand
Were thicker then it selfe with Brothers blood,
Is there not Raine enough in the sweet Heauens
To wash it white as Snow? Whereto serues mercy,
But to confront the visage of Offence?
And what's in Prayer, but this two-fold force,
To be fore-stalled ere we come to fall,
Or pardon'd being downe? Then Ile looke vp,
My fault is past. But oh, what forme of Prayer
Can serue my turne? Forgiue me my foule Murther:
That cannot be, since I am still possest
Of those effects for which I did the Murther.
My Crowne, mine owne Ambition, and my Queene:
May one be pardon'd, and retaine th' offence?
In the corrupted currants of this world,
Offences gilded hand may shoue by Iustice,
And oft 'tis seene, the wicked prize it selfe
Buyes out the Law; but 'tis not so aboue,
There is no shuffling, there the Action lyes
In his true Nature, and we our selues compell'd
Euen to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
To giue in euidence. What then? What rests?
Try what Repentance can. What can it not?
Yet what can it, when one cannot repent?
Oh wretched state! Oh bosome, blacke as death!
Oh limed soule, that strugling to be free,
Art more ingag'd: Helpe Angels, make assay:
Bow stubborne knees, and heart with strings of Steele,
Be soft as sinewes of the new-borne Babe,
All may be well.
Enter Hamlet.

  Ham. Now might I do it pat, now he is praying,
And now Ile doo't, and so he goes to Heauen,
And so am I reueng'd: that would be scann'd,
A Villaine killes my Father, and for that
I his foule Sonne, do this same Villaine send
To heauen. Oh this is hyre and Sallery, not Reuenge.
He tooke my Father grossely, full of bread,
With all his Crimes broad blowne, as fresh as May,
And how his Audit stands, who knowes, saue Heauen:
But in our circumstance and course of thought
'Tis heauie with him: and am I then reueng'd,
To take him in the purging of his Soule,
When he is fit and season'd for his passage? No.
Vp Sword, and know thou a more horrid hent
When he is drunke asleepe: or in his Rage,
Or in th' incestuous pleasure of his bed,
At gaming, swearing, or about some acte
That ha's no rellish of Saluation in't,
Then trip him, that his heeles may kicke at Heauen,
And that his Soule may be as damn'd and blacke
As Hell, whereto it goes. My Mother stayes,
This Physicke but prolongs thy sickly dayes.
Enter.

  King. My words flye vp, my thoughts remain below,
Words without thoughts, neuer to Heauen go.
Enter.

Enter Queene and Polonius.

  Pol. He will come straight:
Looke you lay home to him,
Tell him his prankes haue been too broad to beare with,
And that your Grace hath screen'd, and stoode betweene
Much heate, and him. Ile silence me e'ene heere:
Pray you be round with him

   Ham. within. Mother, mother, mother

   Qu. Ile warrant you, feare me not.
Withdraw, I heare him coming.
Enter Hamlet.

  Ham. Now Mother, what's the matter?
  Qu. Hamlet, thou hast thy Father much offended


   Ham. Mother, you haue my Father much offended

   Qu. Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue

   Ham. Go, go, you question with an idle tongue

   Qu. Why how now Hamlet?
  Ham. Whats the matter now?
  Qu. Haue you forgot me?
  Ham. No by the Rood, not so:
You are the Queene, your Husbands Brothers wife,
But would you were not so. You are my Mother

   Qu. Nay, then Ile set those to you that can speake

   Ham. Come, come, and sit you downe, you shall not
boudge:
You go not till I set you vp a glasse,
Where you may see the inmost part of you?
  Qu. What wilt thou do? thou wilt not murther me?
Helpe, helpe, hoa

   Pol. What hoa, helpe, helpe, helpe

   Ham. How now, a Rat? dead for a Ducate, dead

   Pol. Oh I am slaine.

Killes Polonius

   Qu. Oh me, what hast thou done?
  Ham. Nay I know not, is it the King?
  Qu. Oh what a rash, and bloody deed is this?
  Ham. A bloody deed, almost as bad good Mother,
As kill a King, and marrie with his Brother

   Qu. As kill a King?
  Ham. I Lady, 'twas my word.
Thou wretched, rash, intruding foole farewell,
I tooke thee for thy Betters, take thy Fortune,
Thou find'st to be too busie, is some danger.
Leaue wringing of your hands, peace, sit you downe,
And let me wring your heart, for so I shall
If it be made of penetrable stuffe;
If damned Custome haue not braz'd it so,
That it is proofe and bulwarke against Sense

   Qu. What haue I done, that thou dar'st wag thy tong,
In noise so rude against me?
  Ham. Such an Act
That blurres the grace and blush of Modestie,
Cals Vertue Hypocrite, takes off the Rose
From the faire forehead of an innocent loue,
And makes a blister there. Makes marriage vowes
As false as Dicers Oathes. Oh such a deed,
As from the body of Contraction pluckes
The very soule, and sweete Religion makes
A rapsidie of words. Heauens face doth glow,
Yea this solidity and compound masse,
With tristfull visage as against the doome,
Is thought-sicke at the act

   Qu. Aye me; what act, that roares so lowd, & thunders
in the Index

   Ham. Looke heere vpon this Picture, and on this,
The counterfet presentment of two Brothers:
See what a grace was seated on his Brow,
Hyperions curles, the front of Ioue himselfe,
An eye like Mars, to threaten or command
A Station, like the Herald Mercurie
New lighted on a heauen-kissing hill:
A Combination, and a forme indeed,
Where euery God did seeme to set his Seale,
To giue the world assurance of a man.
This was your Husband. Looke you now what followes.
Heere is your Husband, like a Mildew'd eare
Blasting his wholsom breath. Haue you eyes?
Could you on this faire Mountaine leaue to feed,
And batten on this Moore? Ha? Haue you eyes?
You cannot call it Loue: For at your age,
The hey-day in the blood is tame, it's humble,
And waites vpon the Iudgement: and what Iudgement
Would step from this, to this? What diuell was't,
That thus hath cousend you at hoodman-blinde?
O Shame! where is thy Blush? Rebellious Hell,
If thou canst mutine in a Matrons bones,
To flaming youth, let Vertue be as waxe.
And melt in her owne fire. Proclaime no shame,
When the compulsiue Ardure giues the charge,
Since Frost it selfe, as actiuely doth burne,
As Reason panders Will

   Qu. O Hamlet, speake no more.
Thou turn'st mine eyes into my very soule,
And there I see such blacke and grained spots,
As will not leaue their Tinct

   Ham. Nay, but to liue
In the ranke sweat of an enseamed bed,
Stew'd in Corruption; honying and making loue
Ouer the nasty Stye

   Qu. Oh speake to me, no more,
These words like Daggers enter in mine eares.
No more sweet Hamlet

   Ham. A Murderer, and a Villaine:
A Slaue, that is not twentieth part the tythe
Of your precedent Lord. A vice of Kings,
A Cutpurse of the Empire and the Rule.
That from a shelfe, the precious Diadem stole,
And put it in his Pocket

   Qu. No more.
Enter Ghost.

  Ham. A King of shreds and patches.
Saue me; and houer o're me with your wings
You heauenly Guards. What would your gracious figure?
  Qu. Alas he's mad

   Ham. Do you not come your tardy Sonne to chide,
That laps't in Time and Passion, lets go by
Th' important acting of your dread command? Oh say

   Ghost. Do not forget: this Visitation
Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
But looke, Amazement on thy Mother sits;
O step betweene her, and her fighting Soule,
Conceit in weakest bodies, strongest workes.
Speake to her Hamlet

   Ham. How is it with you Lady?
  Qu. Alas, how is't with you?
That you bend your eye on vacancie,
And with their corporall ayre do hold discourse.
Forth at your eyes, your spirits wildely peepe,
And as the sleeping Soldiours in th' Alarme,
Your bedded haire, like life in excrements,
Start vp, and stand an end. Oh gentle Sonne,
Vpon the heate and flame of thy distemper
Sprinkle coole patience. Whereon do you looke?
  Ham. On him, on him: look you how pale he glares,
His forme and cause conioyn'd, preaching to stones,
Would make them capeable. Do not looke vpon me,
Least with this pitteous action you conuert
My sterne effects: then what I haue to do,
Will want true colour; teares perchance for blood

   Qu. To who do you speake this?
  Ham. Do you see nothing there?
  Qu. Nothing at all, yet all that is I see

   Ham. Nor did you nothing heare?
  Qu. No, nothing but our selues

   Ham. Why look you there: looke how it steals away:
My Father in his habite, as he liued,
Looke where he goes euen now out at the Portall.
Enter.

  Qu. This is the very coynage of your Braine,
This bodilesse Creation extasie is very cunning in

   Ham. Extasie?
My Pulse as yours doth temperately keepe time,
And makes as healthfull Musicke. It is not madnesse
That I haue vttered; bring me to the Test
And I the matter will re-word: which madnesse
Would gamboll from. Mother, for loue of Grace,
Lay not a flattering Vnction to your soule,
That not your trespasse, but my madnesse speakes:
It will but skin and filme the Vlcerous place,
Whil'st ranke Corruption mining all within,
Infects vnseene. Confesse your selfe to Heauen,
Repent what's past, auoyd what is to come,
And do not spred the Compost on the Weedes,
To make them ranke. Forgiue me this my Vertue,
For in the fatnesse of this pursie times,
Vertue it selfe, of Vice must pardon begge,
Yea courb, and woe, for leaue to do him good

   Qu. Oh Hamlet,
Thou hast cleft my heart in twaine

   Ham. O throw away the worser part of it,
And liue the purer with the other halfe.
Good night, but go not to mine Vnkles bed,
Assume a Vertue, if you haue it not, refraine to night,
And that shall lend a kinde of easinesse
To the next abstinence. Once more goodnight,
And when you are desirous to be blest,
Ile blessing begge of you. For this same Lord,
I do repent: but heauen hath pleas'd it so,
To punish me with this, and this with me,
That I must be their Scourge and Minister.
I will bestow him, and will answer well
The death I gaue him: so againe, good night.
I must be cruell, onely to be kinde;
Thus bad begins and worse remaines behinde

   Qu. What shall I do?
  Ham. Not this by no meanes that I bid you do:
Let the blunt King tempt you againe to bed,
Pinch Wanton on your cheeke, call you his Mouse,
And let him for a paire of reechie kisses,
Or padling in your necke with his damn'd Fingers,
Make you to rauell all this matter out,
That I essentially am not in madnesse,
But made in craft. 'Twere good you let him know,
For who that's but a Queene, faire, sober, wise,
Would from a Paddocke, from a Bat, a Gibbe,
Such deere concernings hide, Who would do so,
No in despight of Sense and Secrecie,
Vnpegge the Basket on the houses top:
Let the Birds flye, and like the famous Ape
To try Conclusions in the Basket, creepe
And breake your owne necke downe

   Qu. Be thou assur'd, if words be made of breath,
And breath of life: I haue no life to breath
What thou hast saide to me

   Ham. I must to England, you know that?
  Qu. Alacke I had forgot: 'Tis so concluded on

   Ham. This man shall set me packing:
Ile lugge the Guts into the Neighbor roome,
Mother goodnight. Indeede this Counsellor
Is now most still, most secret, and most graue,
Who was in life, a foolish prating Knaue.
Come sir, to draw toward an end with you.
Good night Mother.
Exit Hamlet tugging in Polonius.

Enter King.

  King. There's matters in these sighes.
These profound heaues
You must translate; Tis fit we vnderstand them.
Where is your Sonne?
  Qu. Ah my good Lord, what haue I seene to night?
  King. What Gertrude? How do's Hamlet?
  Qu. Mad as the Seas, and winde, when both contend
Which is the Mightier, in his lawlesse fit
Behinde the Arras, hearing something stirre,
He whips his Rapier out, and cries a Rat, a Rat,
And in his brainish apprehension killes
The vnseene good old man

   King. Oh heauy deed:
It had bin so with vs had we beene there:
His Liberty is full of threats to all,
To you your selfe, to vs, to euery one.
Alas, how shall this bloody deede be answered?
It will be laide to vs, whose prouidence
Should haue kept short, restrain'd, and out of haunt,
This mad yong man. But so much was our loue,
We would not vnderstand what was most fit,
But like the Owner of a foule disease,
To keepe it from divulging, let's it feede
Euen on the pith of life. Where is he gone?
  Qu. To draw apart the body he hath kild,
O're whom his very madnesse like some Oare
Among a Minerall of Mettels base
Shewes it selfe pure. He weepes for what is done

   King. Oh Gertrude, come away:
The Sun no sooner shall the Mountaines touch,
But we will ship him hence, and this vilde deed,
We must with all our Maiesty and Skill
Both countenance, and excuse.
Enter Ros. & Guild.

Ho Guildenstern:
Friends both go ioyne you with some further ayde:
Hamlet in madnesse hath Polonius slaine,
And from his Mother Clossets hath he drag'd him.
Go seeke him out, speake faire, and bring the body
Into the Chappell. I pray you hast in this.
Exit Gent.

Come Gertrude, wee'l call vp our wisest friends,
To let them know both what we meane to do,
And what's vntimely done. Oh come away,
My soule is full of discord and dismay.

Exeunt.

Enter Hamlet.

  Ham. Safely stowed

   Gentlemen within. Hamlet, Lord Hamlet

   Ham. What noise? Who cals on Hamlet?
Oh heere they come.
Enter Ros. and Guildensterne.

  Ro. What haue you done my Lord with the dead body?
  Ham. Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis Kinne

   Rosin. Tell vs where 'tis, that we may take it thence,
And beare it to the Chappell

   Ham. Do not beleeue it

   Rosin. Beleeue what?
  Ham. That I can keepe your counsell, and not mine
owne. Besides, to be demanded of a Spundge, what replication
should be made by the Sonne of a King

   Rosin. Take you me for a Spundge, my Lord?
  Ham. I sir, that sokes vp the Kings Countenance, his
Rewards, his Authorities (but such Officers do the King
best seruice in the end. He keepes them like an Ape in
the corner of his iaw, first mouth'd to be last swallowed,
when he needes what you haue glean'd, it is but squeezing
you, and Spundge you shall be dry againe

   Rosin. I vnderstand you not my Lord

   Ham. I am glad of it: a knauish speech sleepes in a
foolish eare

   Rosin. My Lord, you must tell vs where the body is,
and go with vs to the King

   Ham. The body is with the King, but the King is not
with the body. The King, is a thing-
  Guild. A thing my Lord?
  Ham. Of nothing: bring me to him, hide Fox, and all
after.

Exeunt.

Enter King.

  King. I haue sent to seeke him, and to find the bodie:
How dangerous is it that this man goes loose:
Yet must not we put the strong Law on him:
Hee's loued of the distracted multitude,
Who like not in their iudgement, but their eyes:
And where 'tis so, th' Offenders scourge is weigh'd
But neerer the offence: to beare all smooth, and euen,
This sodaine sending him away, must seeme
Deliberate pause, diseases desperate growne,
By desperate appliance are releeued,
Or not at all.
Enter Rosincrane.

How now? What hath befalne?
  Rosin. Where the dead body is bestow'd my Lord,
We cannot get from him

   King. But where is he?
  Rosin. Without my Lord, guarded to know your
pleasure

   King. Bring him before vs

   Rosin. Hoa, Guildensterne? Bring in my Lord.
Enter Hamlet and Guildensterne.

  King. Now Hamlet, where's Polonius?
  Ham. At Supper

   King. At Supper? Where?
  Ham. Not where he eats, but where he is eaten, a certaine
conuocation of wormes are e'ne at him. Your worm
is your onely Emperor for diet. We fat all creatures else
to fat vs, and we fat our selfe for Magots. Your fat King,
and your leane Begger is but variable seruice to dishes,
but to one Table that's the end

   King. What dost thou meane by this?
  Ham. Nothing but to shew you how a King may go
a Progresse through the guts of a Begger

   King. Where is Polonius

   Ham. In heauen, send thither to see. If your Messenger
finde him not there, seeke him i'th other place your
selfe: but indeed, if you finde him not this moneth, you
shall nose him as you go vp the staires into the Lobby

   King. Go seeke him there

   Ham. He will stay till ye come

   K. Hamlet, this deed of thine, for thine especial safety
Which we do tender, as we deerely greeue
For that which thou hast done, must send thee hence
With fierie Quicknesse. Therefore prepare thy selfe,
The Barke is readie, and the winde at helpe,
Th' Associates tend, and euery thing at bent
For England

   Ham. For England?
  King. I Hamlet

   Ham. Good

   King. So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes

   Ham. I see a Cherube that see's him: but come, for
England. Farewell deere Mother

   King. Thy louing Father Hamlet

   Hamlet. My Mother: Father and Mother is man and
wife: man & wife is one flesh, and so my mother. Come,
for England.

Exit

  King. Follow him at foote,
Tempt him with speed aboord:
Delay it not, Ile haue him hence to night.
Away, for euery thing is Seal'd and done
That else leanes on th' Affaire, pray you make hast.
And England, if my loue thou holdst at ought,
As my great power thereof may giue thee sense,
Since yet thy Cicatrice lookes raw and red
After the Danish Sword, and thy free awe
Payes homage to vs; thou maist not coldly set
Our Soueraigne Processe, which imports at full
By Letters coniuring to that effect
The present death of Hamlet. Do it England,
For like the Hecticke in my blood he rages,
And thou must cure me: Till I know 'tis done,
How ere my happes, my ioyes were ne're begun.

Exit

Enter Fortinbras with an Armie.

  For. Go Captaine, from me greet the Danish King,
Tell him that by his license, Fortinbras
Claimes the conueyance of a promis'd March
Ouer his Kingdome. You know the Rendeuous:
If that his Maiesty would ought with vs,
We shall expresse our dutie in his eye,
And let him know so

   Cap. I will doo't, my Lord

   For. Go safely on.
Enter.

Enter Queene and Horatio.

  Qu. I will not speake with her

   Hor. She is importunate, indeed distract, her moode
will needs be pittied

   Qu. What would she haue?
  Hor. She speakes much of her Father; saies she heares
There's trickes i'th' world, and hems, and beats her heart,
Spurnes enuiously at Strawes, speakes things in doubt,
That carry but halfe sense: Her speech is nothing,
Yet the vnshaped vse of it doth moue
The hearers to Collection; they ayme at it,
And botch the words vp fit to their owne thoughts,
Which as her winkes, and nods, and gestures yeeld them,
Indeed would make one thinke there would be thought,
Though nothing sure, yet much vnhappily

   Qu. 'Twere good she were spoken with,
For she may strew dangerous coniectures
In ill breeding minds. Let her come in.
To my sicke soule (as sinnes true Nature is)
Each toy seemes Prologue, to some great amisse,
So full of Artlesse iealousie is guilt,
It spill's it selfe, in fearing to be spilt.
Enter Ophelia distracted.

  Ophe. Where is the beauteous Maiesty of Denmark

   Qu. How now Ophelia?
  Ophe. How should I your true loue know from another one?
By his Cockle hat and staffe, and his Sandal shoone

   Qu. Alas sweet Lady: what imports this Song?
  Ophe. Say you? Nay pray you marke.
He is dead and gone Lady, he is dead and gone,
At his head a grasse-greene Turfe, at his heeles a stone.
Enter King.

  Qu. Nay but Ophelia

   Ophe. Pray you marke.
White his Shrow'd as the Mountaine Snow

   Qu. Alas, looke heere my Lord

   Ophe. Larded with sweet Flowers:
Which bewept to the graue did not go,
With true-loue showres

   King. How do ye, pretty Lady?
  Ophe. Well, God dil'd you. They say the Owle was
a Bakers daughter. Lord, wee know what we are, but
know not what we may be. God be at your Table

   King. Conceit vpon her Father

   Ophe. Pray you let's haue no words of this: but when
they aske you what it meanes, say you this:
To morrow is S[aint]. Valentines day, all in the morning betime,
And I a Maid at your Window, to be your Valentine.
Then vp he rose, & don'd his clothes, & dupt the chamber dore,
Let in the Maid, that out a Maid, neuer departed more

   King. Pretty Ophelia

   Ophe. Indeed la? without an oath Ile make an end ont.
By gis, and by S[aint]. Charity,
Alacke, and fie for shame:
Yong men wil doo't, if they come too't,
By Cocke they are too blame.
Quoth she before you tumbled me,
You promis'd me to Wed:
So would I ha done by yonder Sunne,
And thou hadst not come to my bed

   King. How long hath she bin thus?
  Ophe. I hope all will be well. We must bee patient,
but I cannot choose but weepe, to thinke they should
lay him i'th' cold ground: My brother shall knowe of it,
and so I thanke you for your good counsell. Come, my
Coach: Goodnight Ladies: Goodnight sweet Ladies:
Goodnight, goodnight.
Enter.

  King. Follow her close,
Giue her good watch I pray you:
Oh this is the poyson of deepe greefe, it springs
All from her Fathers death. Oh Gertrude, Gertrude,
When sorrowes comes, they come not single spies,
But in Battalians. First, her Father slaine,
Next your Sonne gone, and he most violent Author
Of his owne iust remoue: the people muddied,
Thicke and vnwholsome in their thoughts, and whispers
For good Polonius death; and we haue done but greenly
In hugger mugger to interre him. Poore Ophelia
Diuided from her selfe, and her faire Iudgement,
Without the which we are Pictures, or meere Beasts.
Last, and as much containing as all these,
Her Brother is in secret come from France,
Keepes on his wonder, keepes himselfe in clouds,
And wants not Buzzers to infect his eare
With pestilent Speeches of his Fathers death,
Where in necessitie of matter Beggard,
Will nothing sticke our persons to Arraigne
In eare and eare. O my deere Gertrude, this,
Like to a murdering Peece in many places,
Giues me superfluous death.

A Noise within.

Enter a Messenger.

  Qu. Alacke, what noyse is this?
  King. Where are my Switzers?
Let them guard the doore. What is the matter?
  Mes. Saue your selfe, my Lord.
The Ocean (ouer-peering of his List)
Eates not the Flats with more impittious haste
Then young Laertes, in a Riotous head,
Ore-beares your Officers, the rabble call him Lord,
And as the world were now but to begin,
Antiquity forgot, Custome not knowne,
The Ratifiers and props of euery word,
They cry choose we? Laertes shall be King,
Caps, hands, and tongues, applaud it to the clouds,
Laertes shall be King, Laertes King

   Qu. How cheerefully on the false Traile they cry,
Oh this is Counter you false Danish Dogges.

Noise within. Enter Laertes.

  King. The doores are broke

   Laer. Where is the King, sirs? Stand you all without

   All. No, let's come in

   Laer. I pray you giue me leaue

   Al. We will, we will

   Laer. I thanke you: Keepe the doore.
Oh thou vilde King, giue me my Father

   Qu. Calmely good Laertes

   Laer. That drop of blood, that calmes
Proclaimes me Bastard:
Cries Cuckold to my Father, brands the Harlot
Euen heere betweene the chaste vnsmirched brow
Of my true Mother

   King. What is the cause Laertes,
That thy Rebellion lookes so Gyant-like?
Let him go Gertrude: Do not feare our person:
There's such Diuinity doth hedge a King,
That Treason can but peepe to what it would,
Acts little of his will. Tell me Laertes,
Why thou art thus Incenst? Let him go Gertrude.
Speake man

   Laer. Where's my Father?
  King. Dead

   Qu. But not by him

   King. Let him demand his fill

   Laer. How came he dead? Ile not be Iuggel'd with.
To hell Allegeance: Vowes, to the blackest diuell.
Conscience and Grace, to the profoundest Pit.
I dare Damnation: to this point I stand,
That both the worlds I giue to negligence,
Let come what comes: onely Ile be reueng'd
Most throughly for my Father

   King. Who shall stay you?
  Laer. My Will, not all the world,
And for my meanes, Ile husband them so well,
They shall go farre with little

   King. Good Laertes:
If you desire to know the certaintie
Of your deere Fathers death, if writ in your reuenge,
That Soop-stake you will draw both Friend and Foe,
Winner and Looser

   Laer. None but his Enemies

   King. Will you know them then

   La. To his good Friends, thus wide Ile ope my Armes:
And like the kinde Life-rend'ring Politician,
Repast them with my blood

   King. Why now you speake
Like a good Childe, and a true Gentleman.
That I am guiltlesse of your Fathers death,
And am most sensible in greefe for it,
It shall as leuell to your Iudgement pierce
As day do's to your eye.

A noise within. Let her come in.

Enter Ophelia.

  Laer. How now? what noise is that?
Oh heate drie vp my Braines, teares seuen times salt,
Burne out the Sence and Vertue of mine eye.
By Heauen, thy madnesse shall be payed by waight,
Till our Scale turnes the beame. Oh Rose of May,
Deere Maid, kinde Sister, sweet Ophelia:
Oh Heauens, is't possible, a yong Maids wits,
Should be as mortall as an old mans life?
Nature is fine in Loue, and where 'tis fine,
It sends some precious instance of it selfe
After the thing it loues

   Ophe. They bore him bare fac'd on the Beer,
Hey non nony, nony, hey nony:
And on his graue raines many a teare,
Fare you well my Doue

   Laer. Had'st thou thy wits, and did'st perswade Reuenge,
it could not moue thus

   Ophe. You must sing downe a-downe, and you call
him a-downe-a. Oh, how the wheele becomes it? It is
the false Steward that stole his masters daughter

   Laer. This nothings more then matter

   Ophe. There's Rosemary, that's for Remembraunce.
Pray loue remember: and there is Paconcies, that's for
Thoughts

   Laer. A document in madnesse, thoughts & remembrance
fitted

   Ophe. There's Fennell for you, and Columbines: ther's
Rew for you, and heere's some for me. Wee may call it
Herbe-Grace a Sundaies: Oh you must weare your Rew
with a difference. There's a Daysie, I would giue you
some Violets, but they wither'd all when my Father dyed:
They say, he made a good end;
For bonny sweet Robin is all my ioy

   Laer. Thought, and Affliction, Passion, Hell it selfe:
She turnes to Fauour, and to prettinesse

   Ophe. And will he not come againe,
And will he not come againe:
No, no, he is dead, go to thy Death-bed,
He neuer wil come againe.
His Beard as white as Snow,
All Flaxen was his Pole:
He is gone, he is gone, and we cast away mone,
Gramercy on his Soule.
And of all Christian Soules, I pray God.
God buy ye.

Exeunt. Ophelia

  Laer. Do you see this, you Gods?
  King. Laertes, I must common with your greefe,
Or you deny me right: go but apart,
Make choice of whom your wisest Friends you will,
And they shall heare and iudge 'twixt you and me;
If by direct or by Colaterall hand
They finde vs touch'd, we will our Kingdome giue,
Our Crowne, our Life, and all that we call Ours
To you in satisfaction. But if not,
Be you content to lend your patience to vs,
And we shall ioyntly labour with your soule
To giue it due content

   Laer. Let this be so:
His meanes of death, his obscure buriall;
No Trophee, Sword, nor Hatchment o're his bones,
No Noble rite, nor formall ostentation,
Cry to be heard, as 'twere from Heauen to Earth,
That I must call in question

   King. So you shall:
And where th' offence is, let the great Axe fall.
I pray you go with me.

Exeunt.

Enter Horatio, with an Attendant.

  Hora. What are they that would speake with me?
  Ser. Saylors sir, they say they haue Letters for you

   Hor. Let them come in,
I do not know from what part of the world
I should be greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.
Enter Saylor.

  Say. God blesse you Sir

   Hor. Let him blesse thee too

   Say. Hee shall Sir, and't please him. There's a Letter
for you Sir: It comes from th' Ambassadours that was
bound for England, if your name be Horatio, as I am let
to know it is.

Reads the Letter.

Horatio, When thou shalt haue ouerlook'd this, giue these
Fellowes some meanes to the King: They haue Letters
for him. Ere we were two dayes old at Sea, a Pyrate of very
Warlicke appointment gaue vs Chace. Finding our selues too
slow of Saile, we put on a compelled Valour. In the Grapple, I
boorded them: On the instant they got cleare of our Shippe, so
I alone became their Prisoner. They haue dealt with mee, like
Theeues of Mercy, but they knew what they did. I am to doe
a good turne for them. Let the King haue the Letters I haue
sent, and repaire thou to me with as much hast as thou wouldest
flye death. I haue words to speake in your eare, will make thee
dumbe, yet are they much too light for the bore of the Matter.
These good Fellowes will bring thee where I am. Rosincrance
and Guildensterne, hold their course for England. Of them
I haue much to tell thee, Farewell.
He that thou knowest thine,
Hamlet.
Come, I will giue you way for these your Letters,
And do't the speedier, that you may direct me
To him from whom you brought them.
Enter.

Enter King and Laertes.

  King. Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,
And you must put me in your heart for Friend,
Sith you haue heard, and with a knowing eare,
That he which hath your Noble Father slaine,
Pursued my life

   Laer. It well appeares. But tell me,
Why you proceeded not against these feates,
So crimefull, and so Capitall in Nature,
As by your Safety, Wisedome, all things else,
You mainly were stirr'd vp?
  King. O for two speciall Reasons,
Which may to you (perhaps) seeme much vnsinnowed,
And yet to me they are strong. The Queen his Mother,
Liues almost by his lookes: and for my selfe,
My Vertue or my Plague, be it either which,
She's so coniunctiue to my life, and soule;
That as the Starre moues not but in his Sphere,
I could not but by her. The other Motiue,
Why to a publike count I might not go,
Is the great loue the generall gender beare him,
Who dipping all his Faults in their affection,
Would like the Spring that turneth Wood to Stone,
Conuert his Gyues to Graces. So that my Arrowes
Too slightly timbred for so loud a Winde,
Would haue reuerted to my Bow againe,
And not where I had arm'd them

   Laer. And so haue I a Noble Father lost,
A Sister driuen into desperate tearmes,
Who was (if praises may go backe againe)
Stood Challenger on mount of all the Age
For her perfections. But my reuenge will come

   King. Breake not your sleepes for that,
You must not thinke
That we are made of stuffe, so flat, and dull,
That we can let our Beard be shooke with danger,
And thinke it pastime. You shortly shall heare more,
I lou'd your Father, and we loue our Selfe,
And that I hope will teach you to imagine-
Enter a Messenger.

How now? What Newes?
  Mes. Letters my Lord from Hamlet, This to your
Maiesty: this to the Queene

   King. From Hamlet? Who brought them?
  Mes. Saylors my Lord they say, I saw them not:
They were giuen me by Claudio, he receiu'd them

   King. Laertes you shall heare them:
Leaue vs.

Exit Messenger

High and Mighty, you shall know I am set naked on your
Kingdome. To morrow shall I begge leaue to see your Kingly
Eyes. When I shall (first asking your Pardon thereunto) recount
th' Occasions of my sodaine, and more strange returne.
Hamlet.
What should this meane? Are all the rest come backe?
Or is it some abuse? Or no such thing?
  Laer. Know you the hand?
  Kin. 'Tis Hamlets Character, naked and in a Postscript
here he sayes alone: Can you aduise me?
  Laer. I'm lost in it my Lord; but let him come,
It warmes the very sicknesse in my heart,
That I shall liue and tell him to his teeth;
Thus diddest thou

   Kin. If it be so Laertes, as how should it be so:
How otherwise will you be rul'd by me?
  Laer. If so you'l not o'rerule me to a peace

   Kin. To thine owne peace: if he be now return'd,
As checking at his Voyage, and that he meanes
No more to vndertake it; I will worke him
To an exployt now ripe in my Deuice,
Vnder the which he shall not choose but fall;
And for his death no winde of blame shall breath,
But euen his Mother shall vncharge the practice,
And call it accident: Some two Monthes hence
Here was a Gentleman of Normandy,
I'ue seene my selfe, and seru'd against the French,
And they ran well on Horsebacke; but this Gallant
Had witchcraft in't; he grew into his Seat,
And to such wondrous doing brought his Horse,
As had he beene encorps't and demy-Natur'd
With the braue Beast, so farre he past my thought,
That I in forgery of shapes and trickes,
Come short of what he did

   Laer. A Norman was't?
  Kin. A Norman

   Laer. Vpon my life Lamound

   Kin. The very same

   Laer. I know him well, he is the Brooch indeed,
And Iemme of all our Nation

   Kin. Hee mad confession of you,
And gaue you such a Masterly report,
For Art and exercise in your defence;
And for your Rapier most especiall,
That he cryed out, t'would be a sight indeed,
If one could match you Sir. This report of his
Did Hamlet so envenom with his Enuy,
That he could nothing doe but wish and begge,
Your sodaine comming ore to play with him;
Now out of this

   Laer. Why out of this, my Lord?
  Kin. Laertes was your Father deare to you?
Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,
A face without a heart?
  Laer. Why aske you this?
  Kin. Not that I thinke you did not loue your Father,
But that I know Loue is begun by Time:
And that I see in passages of proofe,
Time qualifies the sparke and fire of it:
Hamlet comes backe: what would you vndertake,
To show your selfe your Fathers sonne indeed,
More then in words?
  Laer. To cut his throat i'th' Church

   Kin. No place indeed should murder Sancturize;
Reuenge should haue no bounds: but good Laertes
Will you doe this, keepe close within your Chamber,
Hamlet return'd, shall know you are come home:
Wee'l put on those shall praise your excellence,
And set a double varnish on the fame
The Frenchman gaue you, bring you in fine together,
And wager on your heads, he being remisse,
Most generous, and free from all contriuing,
Will not peruse the Foiles? So that with ease,
Or with a little shuffling, you may choose
A Sword vnbaited, and in a passe of practice,
Requit him for your Father

   Laer. I will doo't.
And for that purpose Ile annoint my Sword:
I bought an Vnction of a Mountebanke
So mortall, I but dipt a knife in it,
Where it drawes blood, no Cataplasme so rare,
Collected from all Simples that haue Vertue
Vnder the Moone, can saue the thing from death,
That is but scratcht withall: Ile touch my point,
With this contagion, that if I gall him slightly,
It may be death

   Kin. Let's further thinke of this,
Weigh what conuenience both of time and meanes
May fit vs to our shape, if this should faile;
And that our drift looke through our bad performance,
'Twere better not assaid; therefore this Proiect
Should haue a backe or second, that might hold,
If this should blast in proofe: Soft, let me see
Wee'l make a solemne wager on your commings,
I ha't: when in your motion you are hot and dry,
As make your bowts more violent to the end,
And that he cals for drinke; Ile haue prepar'd him
A Challice for the nonce; whereon but sipping,
If he by chance escape your venom'd stuck,
Our purpose may hold there; how sweet Queene.
Enter Queene.

  Queen. One woe doth tread vpon anothers heele,
So fast they'l follow: your Sister's drown'd Laertes

   Laer. Drown'd! O where?
  Queen. There is a Willow growes aslant a Brooke,
That shewes his hore leaues in the glassie streame:
There with fantasticke Garlands did she come,
Of Crow-flowers, Nettles, Daysies, and long Purples,
That liberall Shepheards giue a grosser name;
But our cold Maids doe Dead Mens Fingers call them:
There on the pendant boughes, her Coronet weeds
Clambring to hang; an enuious sliuer broke,
When downe the weedy Trophies, and her selfe,
Fell in the weeping Brooke, her cloathes spred wide,
And Mermaid-like, a while they bore her vp,
Which time she chaunted snatches of old tunes,
As one incapable of her owne distresse,
Or like a creature Natiue, and indued
Vnto that Element: but long it could not be,
Till that her garments, heauy with her drinke,
Pul'd the poore wretch from her melodious buy,
To muddy death

   Laer. Alas then, is she drown'd?
  Queen. Drown'd, drown'd

   Laer. Too much of water hast thou poore Ophelia,
And therefore I forbid my teares: but yet
It is our tricke, Nature her custome holds,
Let shame say what it will; when these are gone
The woman will be out: Adue my Lord,
I haue a speech of fire, that faine would blaze,
But that this folly doubts it.
Enter.

  Kin. Let's follow, Gertrude:
How much I had to doe to calme his rage?
Now feare I this will giue it start againe;
Therefore let's follow.

Exeunt.

Enter two Clownes.

  Clown. Is she to bee buried in Christian buriall, that
wilfully seekes her owne saluation?
  Other. I tell thee she is, and therefore make her Graue
straight, the Crowner hath sate on her, and finds it Christian
buriall

   Clo. How can that be, vnlesse she drowned her selfe in
her owne defence?
  Other. Why 'tis found so

   Clo. It must be Se offendendo, it cannot bee else: for
heere lies the point; If I drowne my selfe wittingly, it argues
an Act: and an Act hath three branches. It is an
Act to doe and to performe; argall she drown'd her selfe
wittingly

   Other. Nay but heare you Goodman Deluer

   Clown. Giue me leaue; heere lies the water; good:
heere stands the man; good: If the man goe to this water
and drowne himselfe; it is will he nill he, he goes;
marke you that? But if the water come to him & drowne
him; hee drownes not himselfe. Argall, hee that is not
guilty of his owne death, shortens not his owne life

   Other. But is this law?
  Clo. I marry is't, Crowners Quest Law

   Other. Will you ha the truth on't: if this had not
beene a Gentlewoman, shee should haue beene buried
out of Christian Buriall

   Clo. Why there thou say'st. And the more pitty that
great folke should haue countenance in this world to
drowne or hang themselues, more then their euen Christian.
Come, my Spade; there is no ancient Gentlemen,
but Gardiners, Ditchers and Graue-makers; they hold vp
Adams Profession

   Other. Was he a Gentleman?
  Clo. He was the first that euer bore Armes

   Other. Why he had none

   Clo. What, ar't a Heathen? how doth thou vnderstand
the Scripture? the Scripture sayes Adam dig'd;
could hee digge without Armes? Ile put another question
to thee; if thou answerest me not to the purpose, confesse
thy selfe-
  Other. Go too

   Clo. What is he that builds stronger then either the
Mason, the Shipwright, or the Carpenter?
  Other. The Gallowes maker; for that Frame outliues a
thousand Tenants

   Clo. I like thy wit well in good faith, the Gallowes
does well; but how does it well? it does well to those
that doe ill: now, thou dost ill to say the Gallowes is
built stronger then the Church: Argall, the Gallowes
may doe well to thee. Too't againe, Come

   Other. Who builds stronger then a Mason, a Shipwright,
or a Carpenter?
  Clo. I, tell me that, and vnyoake

   Other. Marry, now I can tell

   Clo. Too't

   Other. Masse, I cannot tell.
Enter Hamlet and Horatio a farre off.

  Clo. Cudgell thy braines no more about it; for your
dull Asse will not mend his pace with beating; and when
you are ask't this question next, say a Graue-maker: the
Houses that he makes, lasts till Doomesday: go, get thee
to Yaughan, fetch me a stoupe of Liquor.

Sings.

In youth when I did loue, did loue,
me thought it was very sweete:
To contract O the time for a my behoue,
O me thought there was nothing meete

   Ham. Ha's this fellow no feeling of his businesse, that
he sings at Graue-making?
  Hor. Custome hath made it in him a property of easinesse

   Ham. 'Tis ee'n so; the hand of little Imployment hath
the daintier sense

   Clowne sings. But Age with his stealing steps
hath caught me in his clutch:
And hath shipped me intill the Land,
as if I had neuer beene such

   Ham. That Scull had a tongue in it, and could sing
once: how the knaue iowles it to th' grownd, as if it
were Caines Iaw-bone, that did the first murther: It
might be the Pate of a Polititian which this Asse o're Offices:
one that could circumuent God, might it not?
  Hor. It might, my Lord

   Ham. Or of a Courtier, which could say, Good Morrow
sweet Lord: how dost thou, good Lord? this
might be my Lord such a one, that prais'd my Lord such
a ones Horse, when he meant to begge it; might it not?
  Hor. I, my Lord

   Ham. Why ee'n so: and now my Lady Wormes,
Chaplesse, and knockt about the Mazard with a Sextons
Spade; heere's fine Reuolution, if wee had the tricke to
see't. Did these bones cost no more the breeding, but
to play at Loggets with 'em? mine ake to thinke
on't

   Clowne sings. A Pickhaxe and a Spade, a Spade,
for and a shrowding-Sheete:
O a Pit of Clay for to be made,
for such a Guest is meete

   Ham. There's another: why might not that bee the
Scull of a Lawyer? where be his Quiddits now? his
Quillets? his Cases? his Tenures, and his Tricks? why
doe's he suffer this rude knaue now to knocke him about
the Sconce with a dirty Shouell, and will not tell him of
his Action of Battery? hum. This fellow might be in's
time a great buyer of Land, with his Statutes, his Recognizances,
his Fines, his double Vouchers, his Recoueries:
Is this the fine of his Fines, and the recouery of his Recoueries,
to haue his fine Pate full of fine Dirt? will his
Vouchers vouch him no more of his Purchases, and double
ones too, then the length and breadth of a paire of
Indentures? the very Conueyances of his Lands will
hardly lye in this Boxe; and must the Inheritor himselfe
haue no more? ha?
  Hor. Not a iot more, my Lord

   Ham. Is not Parchment made of Sheep-skinnes?
  Hor. I my Lord, and of Calue-skinnes too

   Ham. They are Sheepe and Calues that seek out assurance
in that. I will speake to this fellow: whose Graue's
this Sir?
  Clo. Mine Sir:
O a Pit of Clay for to be made,
for such a Guest is meete

   Ham. I thinke it be thine indeed: for thou liest in't

   Clo. You lye out on't Sir, and therefore it is not yours:
for my part, I doe not lye in't; and yet it is mine

   Ham. Thou dost lye in't, to be in't and say 'tis thine:
'tis for the dead, not for the quicke, therefore thou
lyest

   Clo. 'Tis a quicke lye Sir, 'twill away againe from me
to you

   Ham. What man dost thou digge it for?
  Clo. For no man Sir

   Ham. What woman then?
  Clo. For none neither

   Ham. Who is to be buried in't?
  Clo. One that was a woman Sir; but rest her Soule,
shee's dead

   Ham. How absolute the knaue is? wee must speake
by the Carde, or equiuocation will vndoe vs: by the
Lord Horatio, these three yeares I haue taken note of it,
the Age is growne so picked, that the toe of the Pesant
comes so neere the heeles of our Courtier, hee galls his
Kibe. How long hast thou been a Graue-maker?
  Clo. Of all the dayes i'th' yeare, I came too't that day
that our last King Hamlet o'recame Fortinbras

   Ham. How long is that since?
  Clo. Cannot you tell that? euery foole can tell that:
It was the very day, that young Hamlet was borne, hee
that was mad, and sent into England

   Ham. I marry, why was he sent into England?
  Clo. Why, because he was mad; hee shall recouer his
wits there; or if he do not, it's no great matter there

   Ham. Why?
  Clo. 'Twill not be seene in him, there the men are as
mad as he

   Ham. How came he mad?
  Clo. Very strangely they say

   Ham. How strangely?
  Clo. Faith e'ene with loosing his wits

   Ham. Vpon what ground?
  Clo. Why heere in Denmarke: I haue bin sixeteene
heere, man and Boy thirty yeares

   Ham. How long will a man lie i'th' earth ere he rot?
  Clo. Ifaith, if he be not rotten before he die (as we haue
many pocky Coarses now adaies, that will scarce hold
the laying in) he will last you some eight yeare, or nine
yeare. A Tanner will last you nine yeare

   Ham. Why he, more then another?
  Clo. Why sir, his hide is so tan'd with his Trade, that
he will keepe out water a great while. And your water,
is a sore Decayer of your horson dead body. Heres a Scull
now: this Scul, has laine in the earth three & twenty years

   Ham. Whose was it?
  Clo. A whoreson mad Fellowes it was;
Whose doe you thinke it was?
  Ham. Nay, I know not

   Clo. A pestilence on him for a mad Rogue, a pour'd a
Flaggon of Renish on my head once. This same Scull
Sir, this same Scull sir, was Yoricks Scull, the Kings Iester

   Ham. This?
  Clo. E'ene that

   Ham. Let me see. Alas poore Yorick, I knew him Horatio,
a fellow of infinite Iest; of most excellent fancy, he
hath borne me on his backe a thousand times: And how
abhorred my Imagination is, my gorge rises at it. Heere
hung those lipps, that I haue kist I know not how oft.
Where be your Iibes now? Your Gambals? Your
Songs? Your flashes of Merriment that were wont to
set the Table on a Rore? No one now to mock your own
Ieering? Quite chopfalne? Now get you to my Ladies
Chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch thicke, to this
fauour she must come. Make her laugh at that: prythee
Horatio tell me one thing

   Hor. What's that my Lord?
  Ham. Dost thou thinke Alexander lookt o'this fashion
i'th' earth?
  Hor. E'ene so

   Ham. And smelt so? Puh

   Hor. E'ene so, my Lord

   Ham. To what base vses we may returne Horatio.
Why may not Imagination trace the Noble dust of Alexander,
till he find it stopping a bunghole

   Hor. 'Twere to consider: to curiously to consider so

   Ham. No faith, not a iot. But to follow him thether
with modestie enough, & likeliehood to lead it; as thus.
Alexander died: Alexander was buried: Alexander returneth
into dust; the dust is earth; of earth we make
Lome, and why of that Lome (whereto he was conuerted)
might they not stopp a Beere-barrell?
Imperiall Caesar, dead and turn'd to clay,
Might stop a hole to keepe the winde away.
Oh, that that earth, which kept the world in awe,
Should patch a Wall, t' expell the winters flaw.
But soft, but soft, aside; heere comes the King.
Enter King, Queene, Laertes, and a Coffin, with Lords attendant.

The Queene, the Courtiers. Who is that they follow,
And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken,
The Coarse they follow, did with disperate hand,
Fore do it owne life; 'twas some Estate.
Couch we a while, and mark

   Laer. What Cerimony else?
  Ham. That is Laertes, a very Noble youth: Marke

   Laer. What Cerimony else?
  Priest. Her Obsequies haue bin as farre inlarg'd.
As we haue warrantie, her death was doubtfull,
And but that great Command, o're-swaies the order,
She should in ground vnsanctified haue lodg'd,
Till the last Trumpet. For charitable praier,
Shardes, Flints, and Peebles, should be throwne on her:
Yet heere she is allowed her Virgin Rites,
Her Maiden strewments, and the bringing home
Of Bell and Buriall

   Laer. Must there no more be done ?
  Priest. No more be done:
We should prophane the seruice of the dead,
To sing sage Requiem, and such rest to her
As to peace-parted Soules

   Laer. Lay her i'th' earth,
And from her faire and vnpolluted flesh,
May Violets spring. I tell thee (churlish Priest)
A Ministring Angell shall my Sister be,
When thou liest howling?
  Ham. What, the faire Ophelia?
  Queene. Sweets, to the sweet farewell.
I hop'd thou should'st haue bin my Hamlets wife:
I thought thy Bride-bed to haue deckt (sweet Maid)
And not t'haue strew'd thy Graue

   Laer. Oh terrible woer,
Fall ten times trebble, on that cursed head
Whose wicked deed, thy most Ingenious sence
Depriu'd thee of. Hold off the earth a while,
Till I haue caught her once more in mine armes:

Leaps in the graue.

Now pile your dust, vpon the quicke, and dead,
Till of this flat a Mountaine you haue made,
To o're top old Pelion, or the skyish head
Of blew Olympus

   Ham. What is he, whose griefes
Beares such an Emphasis? whose phrase of Sorrow
Coniure the wandring Starres, and makes them stand
Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,
Hamlet the Dane

   Laer. The deuill take thy soule

   Ham. Thou prai'st not well,
I prythee take thy fingers from my throat;
Sir though I am not Spleenatiue, and rash,
Yet haue I something in me dangerous,
Which let thy wisenesse feare. Away thy hand

   King. Pluck them asunder

   Qu. Hamlet, Hamlet

   Gen. Good my Lord be quiet

   Ham. Why I will fight with him vppon this Theme.
Vntill my eielids will no longer wag

   Qu. Oh my Sonne, what Theame?
  Ham. I lou'd Ophelia; fortie thousand Brothers
Could not (with all there quantitie of Loue)
Make vp my summe. What wilt thou do for her?
  King. Oh he is mad Laertes,
  Qu. For loue of God forbeare him

   Ham. Come show me what thou'lt doe.
Woo't weepe? Woo't fight? Woo't teare thy selfe?
Woo't drinke vp Esile, eate a Crocodile?
Ile doo't. Dost thou come heere to whine;
To outface me with leaping in her Graue?
Be buried quicke with her, and so will I.
And if thou prate of Mountaines; let them throw
Millions of Akers on vs; till our ground
Sindging his pate against the burning Zone,
Make Ossa like a wart. Nay, and thou'lt mouth,
Ile rant as well as thou

   Kin. This is meere Madnesse:
And thus awhile the fit will worke on him:
Anon as patient as the female Doue,
When that her Golden Cuplet are disclos'd;
His silence will sit drooping

   Ham. Heare you Sir:
What is the reason that you vse me thus?
I lou'd you euer; but it is no matter:
Let Hercules himselfe doe what he may,
The Cat will Mew, and Dogge will haue his day.
Enter.

  Kin. I pray you good Horatio wait vpon him,
Strengthen your patience in our last nights speech,
Wee'l put the matter to the present push:
Good Gertrude set some watch ouer your Sonne,
This Graue shall haue a liuing Monument:
An houre of quiet shortly shall we see;
Till then, in patience our proceeding be.

Exeunt.

Enter Hamlet and Horatio

   Ham. So much for this Sir; now let me see the other,
You doe remember all the Circumstance

   Hor. Remember it my Lord?
  Ham. Sir, in my heart there was a kinde of fighting,
That would not let me sleepe; me thought I lay
Worse then the mutines in the Bilboes, rashly,
(And praise be rashnesse for it) let vs know,
Our indiscretion sometimes serues vs well,
When our deare plots do paule, and that should teach vs,
There's a Diuinity that shapes our ends,
Rough-hew them how we will

   Hor. That is most certaine

   Ham. Vp from my Cabin
My sea-gowne scarft about me in the darke,
Grop'd I to finde out them; had my desire,
Finger'd their Packet, and in fine, withdrew
To mine owne roome againe, making so bold,
(My feares forgetting manners) to vnseale
Their grand Commission, where I found Horatio,
Oh royall knauery: An exact command,
Larded with many seuerall sorts of reason;
Importing Denmarks health, and Englands too,
With hoo, such Bugges and Goblins in my life,
That on the superuize no leasure bated,
No not to stay the grinding of the Axe,
My head should be struck off

   Hor. Ist possible?
  Ham. Here's the Commission, read it at more leysure:
But wilt thou heare me how I did proceed?
  Hor. I beseech you

   Ham. Being thus benetted round with Villaines,
Ere I could make a Prologue to my braines,
They had begun the Play. I sate me downe,
Deuis'd a new Commission, wrote it faire,
I once did hold it as our Statists doe,
A basenesse to write faire; and laboured much
How to forget that learning: but Sir now,
It did me Yeomans seriuce: wilt thou know
The effects of what I wrote?
  Hor. I, good my Lord

   Ham. An earnest Coniuration from the King,
As England was his faithfull Tributary,
As loue betweene them, as the Palme should flourish,
As Peace should still her wheaten Garland weare,
And stand a Comma 'tweene their amities,
And many such like Assis of great charge,
That on the view and know of these Contents,
Without debatement further, more or lesse,
He should the bearers put to sodaine death,
Not shriuing time allowed

   Hor. How was this seal'd?
  Ham. Why, euen in that was Heauen ordinate;
I had my fathers Signet in my Purse,
Which was the Modell of that Danish Seale:
Folded the Writ vp in forme of the other,
Subscrib'd it, gau't th' impression, plac't it safely,
The changeling neuer knowne: Now, the next day
Was our Sea Fight, and what to this was sement,
Thou know'st already

   Hor. So Guildensterne and Rosincrance, go too't

   Ham. Why man, they did make loue to this imployment
They are not neere my Conscience; their debate
Doth by their owne insinuation grow:
'Tis dangerous, when the baser nature comes
Betweene the passe, and fell incensed points
Of mighty opposites

   Hor. Why, what a King is this?
  Ham. Does it not, thinkst thee, stand me now vpon
He that hath kil'd my King, and whor'd my Mother,
Popt in betweene th' election and my hopes,
Throwne out his Angle for my proper life,
And with such coozenage; is't not perfect conscience,
To quit him with this arme? And is't not to be damn'd
To let this Canker of our nature come
In further euill

   Hor. It must be shortly knowne to him from England
What is the issue of the businesse there

   Ham. It will be short,
The interim's mine, and a mans life's no more
Then to say one: but I am very sorry good Horatio,
That to Laertes I forgot my selfe;
For by the image of my Cause, I see
The Portraiture of his; Ile count his fauours:
But sure the brauery of his griefe did put me
Into a Towring passion

   Hor. Peace, who comes heere?
Enter young Osricke.

  Osr. Your Lordship is right welcome back to Denmarke

   Ham. I humbly thank you Sir, dost know this waterflie?
  Hor. No my good Lord

   Ham. Thy state is the more gracious; for 'tis a vice to
know him: he hath much Land, and fertile; let a Beast
be Lord of Beasts, and his Crib shall stand at the Kings
Messe; 'tis a Chowgh; but as I saw spacious in the possession
of dirt

   Osr. Sweet Lord, if your friendship were at leysure,
I should impart a thing to you from his Maiesty

   Ham. I will receiue it with all diligence of spirit; put
your Bonet to his right vse, 'tis for the head

   Osr. I thanke your Lordship, 'tis very hot

   Ham. No, beleeue mee 'tis very cold, the winde is
Northerly

   Osr. It is indifferent cold my Lord indeed

   Ham. Mee thinkes it is very soultry, and hot for my
Complexion

   Osr. Exceedingly, my Lord, it is very soultry, as 'twere
I cannot tell how: but my Lord, his Maiesty bad me signifie
to you, that he ha's laid a great wager on your head:
Sir, this is the matter

   Ham. I beseech you remember

   Osr. Nay, in good faith, for mine ease in good faith:
Sir, you are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes is at
his weapon

   Ham. What's his weapon?
  Osr. Rapier and dagger

   Ham. That's two of his weapons; but well

   Osr. The sir King ha's wag'd with him six Barbary horses,
against the which he impon'd as I take it, sixe French
Rapiers and Poniards, with their assignes, as Girdle,
Hangers or so: three of the Carriages infaith are very
deare to fancy, very responsiue to the hilts, most delicate
carriages, and of very liberall conceit

   Ham. What call you the Carriages?
  Osr. The Carriages Sir, are the hangers

   Ham. The phrase would bee more Germaine to the
matter: If we could carry Cannon by our sides; I would
it might be Hangers till then; but on sixe Barbary Horses
against sixe French Swords: their Assignes, and three
liberall conceited Carriages, that's the French but against
the Danish; why is this impon'd as you call it?
  Osr. The King Sir, hath laid that in a dozen passes betweene
you and him, hee shall not exceed you three hits;
He hath one twelue for mine, and that would come to
imediate tryall, if your Lordship would vouchsafe the
Answere

   Ham. How if I answere no?
  Osr. I meane my Lord, the opposition of your person
in tryall

   Ham. Sir, I will walke heere in the Hall; if it please
his Maiestie, 'tis the breathing time of day with me; let
the Foyles bee brought, the Gentleman willing, and the
King hold his purpose; I will win for him if I can: if
not, Ile gaine nothing but my shame, and the odde hits

   Osr. Shall I redeliuer you ee'n so?
  Ham. To this effect Sir, after what flourish your nature
will

   Osr. I commend my duty to your Lordship

   Ham. Yours, yours; hee does well to commend it
himselfe, there are no tongues else for's tongue

   Hor. This Lapwing runs away with the shell on his
head

   Ham. He did Complie with his Dugge before hee
suck't it: thus had he and mine more of the same Beauty
that I know the drossie age dotes on; only got the tune of
the time, and outward habite of encounter, a kinde of
yesty collection, which carries them through & through
the most fond and winnowed opinions; and doe but blow
them to their tryalls: the Bubbles are out

   Hor. You will lose this wager, my Lord

   Ham. I doe not thinke so, since he went into France,
I haue beene in continuall practice; I shall winne at the
oddes: but thou wouldest not thinke how all heere about
my heart: but it is no matter

   Hor. Nay, good my Lord

   Ham. It is but foolery; but it is such a kinde of
gain-giuing as would perhaps trouble a woman

   Hor. If your minde dislike any thing, obey. I will forestall
their repaire hither, and say you are not fit

   Ham. Not a whit, we defie Augury; there's a speciall
Prouidence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be now, 'tis not
to come: if it bee not to come, it will bee now: if it
be not now; yet it will come; the readinesse is all, since no
man ha's ought of what he leaues. What is't to leaue betimes?
Enter King, Queene, Laertes and Lords, with other Attendants with
Foyles,
and Gauntlets, a Table and Flagons of Wine on it.

  Kin. Come Hamlet, come, and take this hand from me

   Ham. Giue me your pardon Sir, I'ue done you wrong,
But pardon't as you are a Gentleman.
This presence knowes,
And you must needs haue heard how I am punisht
With sore distraction? What I haue done
That might your nature honour, and exception
Roughly awake, I heere proclaime was madnesse:
Was't Hamlet wrong'd Laertes? Neuer Hamlet.
If Hamlet from himselfe be tane away:
And when he's not himselfe, do's wrong Laertes,
Then Hamlet does it not, Hamlet denies it:
Who does it then? His Madnesse? If't be so,
Hamlet is of the Faction that is wrong'd,
His madnesse is poore Hamlets Enemy.
Sir, in this Audience,
Let my disclaiming from a purpos'd euill,
Free me so farre in your most generous thoughts,
That I haue shot mine Arrow o're the house,
And hurt my Mother

   Laer. I am satisfied in Nature,
Whose motiue in this case should stirre me most
To my Reuenge. But in my termes of Honor
I stand aloofe, and will no reconcilement,
Till by some elder Masters of knowne Honor,
I haue a voyce, and president of peace
To keepe my name vngorg'd. But till that time,
I do receiue your offer'd loue like loue,
And wil not wrong it

   Ham. I do embrace it freely,
And will this Brothers wager frankely play.
Giue vs the Foyles: Come on

   Laer. Come one for me

   Ham. Ile be your foile Laertes, in mine ignorance,
Your Skill shall like a Starre i'th' darkest night,
Sticke fiery off indeede

   Laer. You mocke me Sir

   Ham. No by this hand

   King. Giue them the Foyles yong Osricke,
Cousen Hamlet, you know the wager

   Ham. Verie well my Lord,
Your Grace hath laide the oddes a'th' weaker side

   King. I do not feare it,
I haue seene you both:
But since he is better'd, we haue therefore oddes

   Laer. This is too heauy,
Let me see another

   Ham. This likes me well,
These Foyles haue all a length.

Prepare to play.

  Osricke. I my good Lord

   King. Set me the Stopes of wine vpon that Table:
If Hamlet giue the first, or second hit,
Or quit in answer of the third exchange,
Let all the Battlements their Ordinance fire,
The King shal drinke to Hamlets better breath,
And in the Cup an vnion shal he throw
Richer then that, which foure successiue Kings
In Denmarkes Crowne haue worne.
Giue me the Cups,
And let the Kettle to the Trumpets speake,
The Trumpet to the Cannoneer without,
The Cannons to the Heauens, the Heauen to Earth,
Now the King drinkes to Hamlet. Come, begin,
And you the Iudges beare a wary eye

   Ham. Come on sir

   Laer. Come on sir.

They play.

  Ham. One

   Laer. No

   Ham. Iudgement

   Osr. A hit, a very palpable hit

   Laer. Well: againe

   King. Stay, giue me drinke.
Hamlet, this Pearle is thine,
Here's to thy health. Giue him the cup,

Trumpets sound, and shot goes off.

  Ham. Ile play this bout first, set by a-while.
Come: Another hit; what say you?
  Laer. A touch, a touch, I do confesse

   King. Our Sonne shall win

   Qu. He's fat, and scant of breath.
Heere's a Napkin, rub thy browes,
The Queene Carowses to thy fortune, Hamlet

   Ham. Good Madam

   King. Gertrude, do not drinke

   Qu. I will my Lord;
I pray you pardon me

   King. It is the poyson'd Cup, it is too late

   Ham. I dare not drinke yet Madam,
By and by

   Qu. Come, let me wipe thy face

   Laer. My Lord, Ile hit him now

   King. I do not thinke't

   Laer. And yet 'tis almost 'gainst my conscience

   Ham. Come for the third.
Laertes, you but dally,
I pray you passe with your best violence,
I am affear'd you make a wanton of me

   Laer. Say you so? Come on.

Play.

  Osr. Nothing neither way

   Laer. Haue at you now.

In scuffling they change Rapiers.

  King. Part them, they are incens'd

   Ham. Nay come, againe

   Osr. Looke to the Queene there hoa

   Hor. They bleed on both sides. How is't my Lord?
  Osr. How is't Laertes?
  Laer. Why as a Woodcocke
To mine Sprindge, Osricke,
I am iustly kill'd with mine owne Treacherie

   Ham. How does the Queene?
  King. She sounds to see them bleede

   Qu. No, no, the drinke, the drinke.
Oh my deere Hamlet, the drinke, the drinke,
I am poyson'd

   Ham. Oh Villany! How? Let the doore be lock'd.
Treacherie, seeke it out

   Laer. It is heere Hamlet.
Hamlet, thou art slaine,
No Medicine in the world can do thee good.
In thee, there is not halfe an houre of life;
The Treacherous Instrument is in thy hand,
Vnbated and envenom'd: the foule practise
Hath turn'd it selfe on me. Loe, heere I lye,
Neuer to rise againe: Thy Mothers poyson'd:
I can no more, the King, the King's too blame

   Ham. The point envenom'd too,
Then venome to thy worke.

Hurts the King.

  All. Treason, Treason

   King. O yet defend me Friends, I am but hurt

   Ham. Heere thou incestuous, murdrous,
Damned Dane,
Drinke off this Potion: Is thy Vnion heere?
Follow my Mother.

King Dyes.

  Laer. He is iustly seru'd.
It is a poyson temp'red by himselfe:
Exchange forgiuenesse with me, Noble Hamlet;
Mine and my Fathers death come not vpon thee,
Nor thine on me.

Dyes.

  Ham. Heauen make thee free of it, I follow thee.
I am dead Horatio, wretched Queene adiew,
You that looke pale, and tremble at this chance,
That are but Mutes or audience to this acte:
Had I but time (as this fell Sergeant death
Is strick'd in his Arrest) oh I could tell you.
But let it be: Horatio, I am dead,
Thou liu'st, report me and my causes right
To the vnsatisfied

   Hor. Neuer beleeue it.
I am more an Antike Roman then a Dane:
Heere's yet some Liquor left

   Ham. As th'art a man, giue me the Cup.
Let go, by Heauen Ile haue't.
Oh good Horatio, what a wounded name,
(Things standing thus vnknowne) shall liue behind me.
If thou did'st euer hold me in thy heart,
Absent thee from felicitie awhile,
And in this harsh world draw thy breath in paine,
To tell my Storie.

March afarre off, and shout within.

What warlike noyse is this?
Enter Osricke.

  Osr. Yong Fortinbras, with conquest come fro[m] Poland
To th' Ambassadors of England giues this warlike volly

   Ham. O I dye Horatio:
The potent poyson quite ore-crowes my spirit,
I cannot liue to heare the Newes from England,
But I do prophesie th' election lights
On Fortinbras, he ha's my dying voyce,
So tell him with the occurrents more and lesse,
Which haue solicited. The rest is silence. O, o, o, o.

Dyes

  Hora. Now cracke a Noble heart:
Goodnight sweet Prince,
And flights of Angels sing thee to thy rest,
Why do's the Drumme come hither?
Enter Fortinbras and English Ambassador, with Drumme, Colours,
and
Attendants.

  Fortin. Where is this sight?
  Hor. What is it ye would see;
If ought of woe, or wonder, cease your search

   For. His quarry cries on hauocke. Oh proud death,
What feast is toward in thine eternall Cell.
That thou so many Princes, at a shoote,
So bloodily hast strooke

   Amb. The sight is dismall,
And our affaires from England come too late,
The eares are senselesse that should giue vs hearing,
To tell him his command'ment is fulfill'd,
That Rosincrance and Guildensterne are dead:
Where should we haue our thankes?
  Hor. Not from his mouth,
Had it th' abilitie of life to thanke you:
He neuer gaue command'ment for their death.
But since so iumpe vpon this bloodie question,
You from the Polake warres, and you from England
Are heere arriued. Giue order that these bodies
High on a stage be placed to the view,
And let me speake to th' yet vnknowing world,
How these things came about. So shall you heare
Of carnall, bloudie, and vnnaturall acts,
Of accidentall iudgements, casuall slaughters
Of death's put on by cunning, and forc'd cause,
And in this vpshot, purposes mistooke,
Falne on the Inuentors head. All this can I
Truly deliuer

   For. Let vs hast to heare it,
And call the Noblest to the Audience.
For me, with sorrow, I embrace my Fortune,
I haue some Rites of memory in this Kingdome,
Which are to claime, my vantage doth
Inuite me,
  Hor. Of that I shall haue alwayes cause to speake,
And from his mouth
Whose voyce will draw on more:
But let this same be presently perform'd,
Euen whiles mens mindes are wilde,
Lest more mischance
On plots, and errors happen

   For. Let foure Captaines
Beare Hamlet like a Soldier to the Stage,
For he was likely, had he beene put on
To haue prou'd most royally:
And for his passage,
The Souldiours Musicke, and the rites of Warre
Speake lowdly for him.
Take vp the body; Such a sight as this
Becomes the Field, but heere shewes much amis.
Go, bid the Souldiers shoote.

Exeunt. Marching: after the which, a Peale of Ordenance are shot
off.


FINIS. The tragedie of HAMLET, Prince of Denmarke.
subjection. Thirdly, while Ammianus says that Theodosius restored
all the frontier forts, excavation appears to indicate that the line
of the Wall with its mile-castles was not repaired. The evidence is
not quite conclusive, for the remains of the last occupation lying
nearest to the surface would be the first to perish. The frontier was
guarded in force till forty years later. This has been contested by
Mommsen, who suggested that the roll of the Army of Britain in the
Notitia Dignitatum was copied from an earlier list in order to hide
the chasm caused by the destruction of corps in the Picto-Scottish
wars. Professor Oman has satisfactorily rebutted this theory. He points
out that, though there is a remarkable survival of old regiments, yet
intermingled with them are many with unquestionable fourth-century
titles such as The Thundering Moors, The Senior Lions, and The
Bears of Valentinian. Claudian distinctly states that to meet Alaric,
Stilicho withdrew troops from the North of Britain. Coins of Maximus
(383-388) have been found on the Wall, proving an occupation until
almost the end of the fourth century; and lacking, as there is,
information of any great disaster, it cannot be asserted that the Roman
hold on Britain was not effective until the last. The case of the
Attacotti is suggestive, and there is evidence (some of it certainly
late) that the British tribes between the walls were practically
adjuncts of the province and co-operating in its defence.

The arrangements of Theodosius sufficed to ensure the safety of the
province for some fourteen years. That much damage had been inflicted
is certain, and perhaps Britain never entirely recovered from the
effects of the invasions of 364-368. It has been suggested that Deva,
Viroconium, and other towns in the west, had been destroyed by the
Scots; but this seems very doubtful. A fact to be noted is that there
was already a considerable Teutonic element in the island in the shape
of many _numeri_ formed out of prisoners taken in the chronic wars on
the Rhine. In 371 the Emperor Valentinian sent over to Britain a whole
Alemannic sub-tribe.

In 383 the Army of Britain revolted against Gratianus, the successor
of Valentinian I., and proclaimed as Emperor an able Spanish general,
Magnus Clemens Maximus, who held high command in the island, but had
been passed over by Gratians ministers for promotion. The Picts and
Scots seized the opportunity to renew their raids, but were repelled
by Maximus, who then, however, crossed to Gaul to expel Gratian.
The troops joined him, Gratian was murdered by one of his officers,
and Maximus became supreme over Gaul and Spain. Gratians brother,
Valentinian II., retained Italy for a while, but in 387 Maximus
expelled him. He hoped, perhaps, to repeat the deeds of Constantine
I., who had conquered the whole empire from the West, but fate decreed
otherwise. In 388 Theodosius I., Emperor of the East, son of Count
Theodosius, came up against him, and he was defeated at Aquileia,
captured, and executed.

Gildas says that, to defend himself against Theodosius, Maximus
stripped Britain of her warriors, and so paved the way for the ruin
that was to come. This, however, is very doubtful, and Gildas cannot be
relied upon except for his own times. But Claudian may be believed when
he says that Britain suffered from Pictish and Scottish raids, though
he no doubt paints his picture in the darkest colours. The Historia
Brittonum says that about 385-390 the Scots were in possession of
North Wales, but that they were driven out by an army led by Cunedda
and his eight sons from the land of the Otadini--_i.e._, the Lothians
(Manau Gododin). If this statement--and it is very precise--may be
taken as historical fact, it can only mean that the Otadini now formed
part of the province, and that an auxiliary force led by one of their
chiefs was employed to clear North Wales of the Scots. Cunedda was
clearly a Romanized Briton; his father ternus and his grandfather
Paternus bear just the quaint names that were common among Romans
in the fourth century. It is possible that Cuneddas campaign was
initiated by Maximus. Maxim Gwledig (= Maximus Imperator) bulks
largely in British legend, and it is permissible to suppose that there
was some solid reason for the respect paid to his memory. The theory
that Wales, and possibly Damnonia, were defended by their own local
levies accounts satisfactorily for the fact that in the Notitia we find
no regular troops stationed in those regions. It also explains the
early formation of monarchical states among them, which is a feature
of the next century. Finally, if a large part of the warriors of the
Otadini went to Wales, we might expect to find the defence of the north
weakened, and, if Claudian may be trusted, this is what did happen.

When Theodosius the Great died in 395 the Roman Empire was already
sorely pressed, but for more than ten years ruin was staved off by the
great Vandal Stilicho, guardian of the weak young Emperor Honorius, and
Commander-in-Chief in the West. Amongst other things, he reorganized
the defences of Britain. The General in the North was called the Duke
of the Britains (_Dux Britanniarum_). From Brancaster, in Norfolk,
to Southampton Water extended the district of the Count of the Saxon
Shore (_Comes Littoris Saxonici_). Both were under the supreme command
of the Count of the Britains (_Comes Britanniarum_), who controlled a
reserve force which could be used at need to strengthen either north or
east. The VIth Legion was still at York; the IInd was now at Rutupi;
and there were besides thirty-seven auxiliary regiments of infantry
and sixteen of cavalry--nearly 60,000 men in all. There were also two
naval squadrons--one stationed on the Saxon Shore, the other off the
Lancashire coast.

One most important fact must be kept steadily in mind: the Army of
Britain, though it contained some foreign corps and a large number of
soldiers of foreign extraction, was in the main British in composition
and feeling. For centuries the troops of each Roman province had been
very largely recruited locally, either by conscripts or the children
of the soldiers themselves, often trained to camp-life and war from
their youth up. A so-called Moorish cohort would perhaps not contain
a single Moor, and so on throughout the army. A regiment stationed in
Britain kept its name, but was made up with British recruits.

In 402 King Alaric and the Visigoths set out to invade Italy, and
Stilicho was forced to weaken the Army of Britain for the defence of
Ravenna and Rome. Among the troops withdrawn was the VIth Legion--its
long residence at York at last at an end--and none of them ever came
back; for though Stilicho hurled invasion after invasion out of Italy,
on January 1, 406, a horde of Teutons poured over the frozen Rhine and
began to waste Gaul. Like an army whose line has been pierced, the
provinces found the Germans interposed between them, and Britain was
cut off from Italy.

Thereupon the Army of Britain appears to have decided that Honorius and
Stilicho were useless as defenders of the Empire, and resolved to save
it themselves--by mutinying! They selected a certain Marcus as emperor,
and almost immediately murdered him. A second, named Gratianus, had
the same fate; but the third, Constantine, was made of sterner stuff,
and wore the purple for over three years--perhaps because he was wise
enough to leave Britain. He decided to imitate the example of Maxim
Gwledig, and crossed to Gaul in 407. This is the event so often, and
wrongly, called the departure of the legions.

Constantine had been chosen Emperor in order to carry out the task with
which Stilicho had failed to successfully grapple. Is it to be supposed
that he would have dared to leave Britain defenceless, even had he so
desired? The idea is absurd. He no doubt took to Gaul a considerable
force, which must have been mainly British, and his chief general,
Gerontius (Geraint), was a Briton. But to suppose that, as Gildas
wails, the province was left defenceless, and that the inhabitants were
so effeminate and cowardly as to be incapable of bearing arms, cannot
be allowed. It is certain that the Britons were among the best fighting
peoples of the Empire, and when Constantine crossed to Gaul in 407 he
undoubtedly left his base properly garrisoned. It is not even certain
that the IInd Legion left Britain.

Constantine laid hands on a great part of Gaul and Spain--so far
as they were not held by barbarians--and marched down to the Rhone
to oust Honorius, who had just murdered his guardian and principal
stay, the great Stilicho. Gerontius, however, revolted from him, and
in 411 he was besieged in Arelate (Arles), captured, and executed.
Meanwhile, what of Britain? In 409 came the first mutterings of the
coming storm. The Saxons and their allies made raids both on Britain
and Gaul. Thereupon the provincials disowned Constantine, who was
clearly no more of a success than Stilicho, expelled his officials,
elected others of their own choosing, raised new levies of troops, and
repulsed the raiders. This is vouched for by the chronicler Zosimus.
The ministers of Honorius, beset by many troubles, had already sent
word to the British communities that they must defend themselves, and
the provincials probably regarded their action as one of adherence to
the legitimate Emperor as against usurpers of the type of Constantine.
Certainly there was no conscious withdrawal from the Empire.

The course of events can only be dimly conjectured. In the east the
Romanized cities probably took the lead. In the west and north matters
went differently. These regions were less civilized, and the political
unit was the tribe and not the city. In North Wales Cunedda was
practically king, and small monarchial states soon sprang up elsewhere.
In the north, about 450, St. Patrick tells us of a military state
(Strathclyde), ruled by a chief whom he calls Coroticus, who possessed
both a paid army and a fleet, and had not only beaten off the Scots,
but had made retaliating raids on Ireland. Both Cunedda and Coroticus
are called Gwledig (overlord) in the Welsh genealogies, and Cunedda at
least appears to have held the post of _Dux Britanniarum_ (General of
the Northern Frontier). Apparently after his death a new state named
Reged arose on the Wall; it was founded by Coel--the Old King Cole of
an irreverent nursery rhyme. Speaking roughly, we may say that in South
Wales and Damnonia tribal kingdoms, in North Wales and the north-west
military states, were the rule; while the cities apparently kept up
Roman traditions, and by means of their walls maintained independence.

It will be seen that in many ways the outlook was bad for Britain.
The interests of the military chiefs of the tribal dynasts and of the
Romanized cities were certain to diverge, and hostilities between them
were almost inevitable. Probably even the cities did not always find
co-operation easy. It is possible that there were already numbers of
Teutons in the country; there may have been Teutonic settlements on
the coast of Lothian as early as 400. The fleet of the Saxon Shore had
apparently disappeared, presumably during the troubled period 407-411.
Finally, the country lacked the unifying bond of a common religion.
It is practically certain that though the Christian Church in Britain
was a vigorous organization, its adherents were in a minority. The
church at Calleva is so small as to make it certain that the Christian
population was only some hundreds in number, the total of inhabitants
being, perhaps, 5,000. The fragments of a local god were found by the
explorers around its pedestal--_i.e._, the statue was standing there
when disaster overtook the place. When St. Germanus visited Britain
in 429 he baptized thousands of converts. Probably in Britain, as
elsewhere in the failing Empire, the adhesion of the upper classes to
Christianity was nominal or non-existent, as it was to be for some
generations; and the majority among the masses was frankly pagan.

Thus divided, distracted, with a defensive system disorganized by
repeated withdrawals or shifting of troops, and with little prospect of
co-operation between its cities and tribal cantons, Britain had to face
attacks from three sides. On the north were the restless Picts, on the
west the Scots, on the east the Teutons.

To construct anything like a connected narrative out of the few
authorities who shed light on this period is almost, if not quite,
impossible. The whole epoch has been called the lost period, but
it would not be by any means unfair to describe it as neglected. The
authorities are scanty, obscure, and hopelessly confused; but it is
possible, by careful study, to construct a not improbable skeleton of
facts.

From 409 to 429 we have no clear indication of the course of events in
Britain. It seems, however, to have been somewhat as follows:

Internally the process of reorganization with city states, tribal
principalities, and military monarchies went on, probably with much
jarring and intestine strife, of which there are indications in Gildas,
and the queer mosaic of fairy tales, legends, genealogies, and scraps
of lost chronicles called the Historia Brittonum. The most remarkable
fact is that the Picts and Teutons were in communication, and acted at
times in conjunction. Various statements in the Life of St. Germanus,
and in the Historia Brittonum lead one to infer that the earliest
settlements of the English in Britain were neither in the south nor
the east, but on the Firth of Forth. According to the Northumbrian
genealogies in the Historia Brittonum, Soemil, the predecessor of
Aella of Deira, in the fifth generation, was the first to separate
Deira from Bernicia. This must mean that he founded a Teutonic
principality in the north-east. Bernicia is, apparently, a corruption
of Brigantia (Bryneich, or Berneich, in the Historia).

If, as early as 420 (Soemil can hardly be placed much later), the
Angles were able to effect permanent settlements in north-east Britain,
they were probably raiding there years before. That their raids, more
or less in conjunction with the Picts, penetrated a considerable
distance south is also probable, though the establishment of the
kingdoms of Strathclyde and Reged in this quarter tended to check them.
It was probably during the intestine struggles, which resulted in the
founding of these states, that the English effected their lodgments.
The men of Strathclyde and Reged soon began a series of fierce attacks
upon them, and for a century and a half they were confined to narrow,
and perhaps disconnected, slips of coast; but once established, they
were never really dislodged. The Britons, who had the Picts and Scots
also on their hands, and were further distracted by dynastic broils,
never made the united attack which might have driven the English, to
use Napoleons famous phrase, into the sea.

In the west the Britons were probably more occupied with the Scots
and Irish than with Picts, though it is highly probable that German
pirate squadrons occasionally harassed the south-west. In Lancashire
and western Yorkshire was the kingdom of Theyrnllwg, and to the east
another called Elmet, whose capital was Loidis (Leeds). Both these
states may have represented sub-tribes of the Brigantes. In the western
Midlands was the kingdom of Powys, and in the south-west Damnonia. In
Wales there were at least three states, probably corresponding to the
old tribal cantons of the Ordovices, Silures, and Demet. Gwynedd,
under the dynasty of Cunedda, appears to have been generally regarded
as the chief state, and the suzerainty of its kings was sometimes
effective. There are indications that Cunedda, at least, ruled both
Gwynedd and Theyrnllwg, but, as usual in Celtic dynasties, his
successors divided his heritage.

On the whole, it seems, as is natural, that while the British states
were in course of formation, the Picts and Scots were able to raid the
province with comparative success for some years. About 425 Dathi,
Ard-righ (suzerain king) of Ireland, is said, in the Irish annals, to
have been slain oversea; and this may have occurred on a raid against
the Britons. In 429 Germanus, Bishop of Auxerre, who had formerly
been Dux of Aremorica, and Lupus, Bishop of Troyes, came to Britain
to combat the Pelagian heresy which had sprung up in the island. It
is curious that a Church which had so far failed to Christianize the
province could produce a heresiarch like Pelagius; but the phenomenon
is not by any means unparalleled.

Germanus was one of those fine men about whom all that was best of
society rallied in those terrible days. One biography of him, written
by a Gallic priest, survives; another, probably composed in Britain, is
lost, but was known to one of the compilers of the Historia Brittonum.

Germanus and Lupus met their Pelagian opponents in synod at Verulam. We
are told that they worshipped at the tomb of St. Alban; and as this lay
outside the walls, it may be considered as certain that the south-east
had not been visited by raiders. The sanctity of the spot explains
the choice of it as the meeting-place. We might rather have expected
London, but it is noteworthy that St. Pauls is said to have been built
on the site, not of a former church, but of a temple of Apollo; and
it is possible that London, a great resort of merchants, was rather a
stronghold of eclecticism, if not paganism, than of Christianity.

The Gallic bishops had other and more mundane work to do before they
departed. Some part of the island, probably the north-east, was being
wasted by a joint invasion of Picts and Saxons. There must have been
men in the British levies opposing them who had heard of Germanus as a
soldier--officers and men of the old Imperial cohorts--and a message
was sent begging the Gallic bishops to join the camp. The point upon
which the biographer dwells is naturally the conversion and baptism on
the eve of battle of thousands of the pagan peasant soldiers, but we
may suspect that the old warrior Germanus was busily engaged as well
in drilling and organizing his motley troops. His generalship appears
to have been very good; he drew the enemy into a battle on his own
chosen ground. The British army was stationed in a valley, the centre
in battle array at its head, the wings carefully concealed, thrown
forward along both sides. To inspirit the new levies, Germanus gave as
the word for the day Alleluia.

The Saxons and Picts, presumably in the dense column formation common
to barbarians, pushed boldly up the valley against the British centre,
but when they came to close quarters Germanus let loose the ambushed
wings. With wild shouts of Alleluia! Alleluia! the Britons poured
down to the attack, and a complete rout ensued, the barbarians breaking
up and throwing away their arms in panic-stricken flight. A river lay
athwart their line of retreat, and the passage of this proved as fatal
as the battle. The result appears to have been to secure the north for
a time at least. When next we get a glimpse of these regions we find
a strong British state taking the offensive against the Picts, and
gaining territory from them; this may very well have been due to the
victory of Germanus. The battlefield cannot be identified, but it is
as well to warn visitors to Maes Garmon, near Mold, that this site is
an extremely unlikely one. Picts are not likely to have raided in this
direction, and the English did not appear there for at least a century
and a half.

It is to be inferred from the Vita S. Germani that in the south-east
at least Britain was still under Roman civil government. We hear
nothing of kings or even chiefs. Roman official titles are mentioned,
and we are told that the magnates were richly attired. It is impossible
to make anything of the strange statement in the Anglo-Saxon
Chronicle that in 418 the Romans in Britain burned their treasures and
fled to Gaul. The Chronicle is far too late to be of any authority for
this period. Its chronology cannot in any case be depended upon; but it
is just possible that there really was during this period a migration
of some sort, perhaps of non-British officials and their families. It
must not be forgotten that Britain not only extended northward to the
Forth, but also, perhaps, already had a colony in Gaul--the modern
Brittany. The Historia Brittonum makes the quite credible statement
(though some of the details look rather absurd) that this settlement
was initiated by Magnus Maximus, but, at any rate, we know from
Sidonius Apollinaris that in 469 it was a very large one. Possibly, the
statement above may refer to some incident connected with Brittany.

Finally, it is very necessary even to-day to warn readers against the
foolish idea that Romans and Britons were at this date distinct
peoples. A Roman meant during the Imperial period anyone under the
Roman Government possessing civil rights--that is, almost all the free
population. A Roman might be by birth a Briton, a Gaul, an Italian, a
Greek, an Illyrian, a Jew; and a Briton or a Greek was neither more nor
less a Roman than an Italian. The average Roman legion rarely contained
Italians, much less inhabitants of the city of Rome; but, nevertheless,
the soldiers were Roman. So with the civil administration: a Roman
Ministry might contain members of every race under the Roman rule.
Once, again, we must repeat that men were Roman by virtue of their
political status, and not by reason of their national origin. The
Britons were Romans--Romano-Hellenic, that is, in manner and customs,
Latin in speech. The Roman government never definitely abandoned
Britain. In the troubles of the fifth century the province was left,
like many other regions, under local autonomy until such time as the
central government could again exercise control, and for various
reasons this never occurred. The country almost insensibly drifted
apart from the labouring Roman world, but a hundred years later its
people still called themselves Cives, and were proud that they were
Romans.

After the events of 429, it appears that the course of history somewhat
changed. The Alleluia victory apparently checked serious foreign
invasions, but there is no reason to doubt that, as the Historia
says, Britain was in alarm. The Roman world was in wild disorder, which
must have affected Britain; but when, in 447, Germanus once more came
to combat Pelagianism, we do not hear of foreign war. Yet a Gallic
chronicle says that Britain was conquered by the Saxons in 441, and
Gildas states that in 446 some British provincials sent a miserable
letter, called The groans of the Britons, to the great general
Atius, who then upheld the Roman name in Gaul. The latter statement
we can neither accept nor deny. Possibly it is only one of Gildass
rhetorical flights; possibly, if the incident occurred, it referred
only to a single community. The Gallic chronicler may have been
misinformed, or his chronology may be wrong. In any case, his statement
must be rejected. Perhaps there was a raid in 441, the consequences of
which were exaggerated by those who were responsible for the report
made of it in Gaul. It seems impossible that, if the English conquest
had already begun in 447, we should hear nothing of it in connection
with the second visit of Germanus.

The only conclusion to which it is possible to come is that after the
Alleluia victory Britain, though more or less harassed by sporadic
raids, was for some years comparatively free from barbarian attacks.




CHAPTER IV

THE ENGLISH CONQUEST


Although the English invasion of Britain is by far the most important
of all those which have affected the island, it is impossible to focus
any very clearly defined picture of the happenings during the long
period of nearly two centuries that followed the so-called departure
of the Romans. The picture is blurred, but certain strong outlines
are conspicuous, and in this chapter an attempt has been made to
concentrate attention on these salient features.

The incident which led to the English invaders obtaining a secure
foothold in south-east Britain was probably connected with internal
troubles rather than foreign invasions. The Celtic chieftains of the
south-west were less occupied than their northern contemporaries in
repelling foreign invaders. They must have cast longing eyes upon the
wealthy Romanized cities, and cherished hopes of bringing them, or some
of them, under their sway. Vortigern, one of these rulers, probably
prince of the Silures, seems to have partially succeeded in doing so,
and about A.D. 450 appears as supreme over the south as far as Dover
Straits. Whether his suzerainty extended north of the Thames must be
considered very doubtful.

The Historia Brittonum describes the situation as follows:

After the above-said war, the assassination of their rulers, and the
victory of Maximus, who slew Gratian, _and the termination of the Roman
power in Britain, they were in alarm forty years_. Vortigern then
reigned in Britain, and in his time the people had cause of dread,
not only from the inroads of the Picts and Scots, _but also from the
Romans, and their apprehensions of Ambrosius_.

The passage is a very confused one, and what appear to be the
significant sentences are italicized. The opening statement is a kind
of summing-up of the confused sections which precede it. It has been
seriously misunderstood by several authors, but its meaning is fairly
obvious. The chronology of the Historia is its most hopeless feature,
but here it presents no great difficulty. Forty years after the end of
the Roman power, Vortigern reigned in Britain. As we have seen, direct
Roman rule ended in 410-411. We therefore arrive at the year 450-451.
Bede says that Hengist entered Britain in the reign of Marcianus and
Valentinian III.--_i.e._, after 450; but he is out in his reckoning,
and so makes the date A.D. 449. Gildas makes it after 446. Probably it
was after 447, for in that year St. Germanus again came to Britain, and
no foreign troubles are mentioned. On the other hand, the Historia
says that Vortigern died while St. Germanus was in the island--_i.e._,
in 447. This would place the invasion of Kent in 445 or 446, and if it
really did occur then, it agrees somewhat better with the famous letter
to Atius recorded by Gildas. But we dare not trust Gildas for anything
before 470, and the Life of St. Germanus used by the compilers of
the Historia was evidently a very fanciful work. On the whole the
chronology of the English invasions is very uncertain. The one definite
indication is that Vortigerns reception of Hengist took place forty
years after the end of Roman power in Britain.

Vortigern was also in fear of Ambrosius. This is a most interesting
statement. The Ambrosius here mentioned may very well have been the
father of the greater figure soon to be noticed. The name is a Latin
one, and Ambrosius was almost certainly the leader of the Romanized
inhabitants as distinct from the Kymry of the West. His family seems
to have been a notable one, for we can hardly doubt that they are
the forbears of the Ambrosius Aurelianus celebrated by Gildas. Where
Ambrosius had his stronghold is not known; quite possibly he was in
league with London, Verulam, and other Roman towns, and was perhaps the
chief of their forces.

Finally, Vortigern was afraid of the Romans. This is probably exactly
the state of affairs if he reigned from about 440 to 450; for the great
general Atius was very active in Gaul during this period, and may
have sent assistance to the Romanizing party in Britain. Quite possibly
in the letters mentioned by Gildas the barbarians were the Kymry, and
the second visit of St. Germanus may have been as much political as
religious.

However this may be--and everything during this period is largely
conjecture--there is no reason to doubt that Vortigern, whose
suzerainty was evidently a most uneasy one, did, as the Historia
says, employ German mercenaries under Hengist and Hors, or Horsa. Very
likely he had other bands in his pay, but the fame of this one has
outshone that of the rest.

Hengist is practically beyond doubt an authentic historical figure. He
is probably to be identified with the Hengist in the famous poem of
Beowulf, who made a truce with the Frisian slayers of his lord Hnf.
The custom was for the followers to die with their lord or avenge him.
The fact that Hengist did neither would be quite enough to cause his
disgrace, and the Historia Brittonum distinctly says that he was an
exile. It also appears to bear out the Historias character of him as
a cunning and low-minded, if able, man.

The followers of Hengist only manned three ships, and possibly they
were in a distressed condition when Vortigern took them under his
protection. As the small band can hardly have been of much account by
itself, we must suppose either that the king employed Hengist to raise
a mercenary force, or that when the breach between employers and
employed occurred, the latter were joined by swarms of adventurers.
The Historia says that, owing to Hengists persuasions, Vortigern
employed in all fifty-nine ships crews. The romantic feature of the
affair, according to the Historia, is that Vortigern fell violently
in love with Hengists daughter, who accompanied him, and married her.
It was not quite an honour for the Jutish maiden Hrothwyn (Rowena),
if indeed that was her name, for Vortigerns amours were numerous and
indiscriminate. She merely became one of his harem. But if the incident
be true, it is another application of the French proverb, _Cherchez la
femme!_ The marriage was certainly the beginning of woes for Britain.

Vortigern apparently defeated and slew Ambrosius with the help of his
German mercenaries, but then his troubles began. The Isle of Ruim
(Thanet) had been assigned as the land-recompense of the mercenaries,
but they declared that it was too small. Bede says that it supported
six hundred families in his day, and as fifty-nine ships crews would
mean hardly less than fifteen hundred warriors, the latter were, from
their own point of view, perfectly right. In any case, they were
accustomed to living by their swords, and presumably believed that
Vortigern, allied to them by marriage, would give way to pressure
exercised by the old and still practised methods of slaughter and
pillage.

At any rate, in 455, if we may trust the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle,
the bands of Hengist broke out of Thanet and began to move westward,
ravaging as they went. Probably at first they did not attack the
walled towns; they may merely have intended an armed protest. Where
Vortigern was or what he did we cannot say; his sons Vortimer and
Categirn led the opposition to the invaders. A battle was fought
at a place not specified, and Hengist was driven back into Thanet.
Presumably reinforced from the Continent, he again emerged from his
fastness, and encountered Vortimer in two battles, both claimed as
British victories, but clearly indecisive. One was on the Durgwentid
River (perhaps either the Stour or Darenth), the other at Rit-hergabail
or Episford, generally supposed to be Aylesford on the Medway. Horsa
and Categirn were both slain. It was apparently an English reverse, for
the fourth battle was fought by a Roman monument on the shore of the
Channel. The invaders were defeated and driven on board their ships;
but Vortimer, unfortunately for the Britons, died soon afterwards,
perhaps of wounds received in the battle. The story goes that he
desired his followers to bury him at the spot where Hengist had
landed--presumably therefore at Ebbsfleet--so that in death he might
keep watch over the country that he had for the moment saved. He was
not obeyed. Geoffrey of Monmouth, who may perhaps have had some written
authority for his statement, says that he was buried at London.

Vortigern now reappears on the scene, and opens negotiations with the
invaders. The Historia says that Hengist arranged a conference and
banquet of six hundred unarmed notables, three hundred from each side.
He, however, ordered his own followers to hide knives in their shoes,
and when the feast was in full progress every Jute drew his dagger upon
his helpless British comrade. Vortigern alone was spared, and, probably
in fear of his life, concluded peace on very disadvantageous terms.
There is no reason to discredit the story, except the quite inadequate
one that the ancestors of Englishmen could not be guilty of such
treachery.

This catastrophe appears to have ended Vortigerns sovereignty in the
south, and he fled to his own Welsh realm. There is a wild legend that
Germanus called down fire from heaven upon him, but Germanus had died
in Gaul some years before. The motive of the legend is obvious: no
fate was too terrible for the hated dynast who had betrayed Britain,
and the temptation to bring in Germanus must have been irresistible.
Vortigerns genealogy appears to have been well known, and his
descendants were ruling in south-east Wales ten generations later.

Hengist does not ever appear to have lost Thanet, and in the disorder
after Vortigerns death he was again able to invade Kent. In 457 he
won a victory at Crayford, and the Britons retreated to the walls of
London; yet in 465, and again in 473, the invaders are apparently still
fighting in Kent. As the Jutish kingdom never extended far beyond the
bounds of the modern county, there is every reason to believe that the
conquest of Kent was a very slow and difficult process.

Meanwhile, however, the successes of Hengist attracted the notice of
his kinsfolk in Germany, and expeditions, not for purposes of plunder,
but for permanent conquest, were being formed. The supposition must be
put aside that England was founded as a number of separate states by
independent bands of invaders. That the Britons made a stern resistance
is beyond doubt, and to have been successful the invaders must have
been acting in large and more or less organized bodies. Moreover, the
invasions were national ones. Kent, indeed, possibly Sussex, may have
been independent creations by chiefs of bodies of mixed mercenaries,
but the whole English people (Angel-cynn) sooner or later took part in
the settlement. It was a great national migration, and undoubtedly one
of the most remarkable in history. The emigrants could not march by
land, like the Goths and Franks, in great masses, which could bear down
resistance by sheer weight of numbers and courage. They had to transfer
themselves over hundreds of miles of sea in more or less frail open
craft, at the mercy of every gale; yet in the course of a century the
name of Angle had vanished from the Continent, and become peculiar to
Britain. Possibly a remnant of the people remained behind; to this day
a district of Schleswig bears the name of Angeln.

Bede says that the invaders came from three nations of Germany, the
Angles, Saxons, and Jutes. This appears to be so far true in that
these three peoples took part in the migration; but while practically
the entire English nation came, they were accompanied by only a few
Saxons and a portion of the Jutes. It is very probable, also, that
fragments of nearly all the Teutonic tribes on the Continent were in
the invading hosts. The kingdom of Kent is said to have been Jutish;
certainly its social structure differed remarkably from that of the
other English states, but Hengist himself seems to have been an Angle.
Bede says that the Kentish Code was written in the _English_ language.
The confused grammatical structure of the present English tongue
certainly points to a mingling of races, and on the whole we may infer
that the invasion was conducted not only by the Angles, but by many
kindred tribes, and that these latter in course of time gradually came
to regard themselves as English also. Early medival writers use the
terms Angle and Saxon indiscriminately.

The invaders were no mere barbarians. Their deeds were often barbarous
enough, no doubt; but it must be said that the picture drawn by Bede of
kings like Aethelberht and Eadwine and their followers shows them in a
very favourable light. Perhaps Bede idealizes; possibly in the course
of a century the invaders had softened somewhat; but as that century
had been passed for the most part in warfare, the latter conclusion is
unlikely. At any rate, the English brought with them a highly organized
social system, and judging merely from recorded facts, they were, as a
nation, possessed of many of the elements of civilization.

[Illustration: ANGLO-SAXON WEAPONS AND OTHER OBJECTS IN THE BRITISH
MUSEUM.

  1 and 2. Shield-boss and knife from Anglo-Saxon cemetery at Long
      Wittenham, Berks. 3. Shield-boss, about 7 inches in height,
      from grave at Twickenham. 4. Iron sword found in the Thames,
      about 3 feet long; the wooden handle is a rough copy of one
      found in Cumberland. 5. Spear-head, about 28 inches long, found
      in Thames, London. 6, 7, and 9. Spear or lance heads. 8. Brace
      of shield showing hand-grip in centre, about 16 inches long,
      from Droxford, Hants. 10. An iron lamp or cup, about 12 inches
      high, from a grave at Broomfield, Essex. 11. Anglo-Saxon bronze
      bowl from a grave at Sarre, Thanet.]

Neither were the invaders a mere disorderly throng of ill-armed and
unarmoured marauders. The evidence of archology is all to the effect
that they were acquainted with, and used, defensive armour. Probably
only the upper classes wore it, but as elaborate and costly coats of
mail have been found in graves in Schleswig and Denmark dating from
this period, this deduction cannot be made without qualification.
Mail and weapons, which latter have been found in thousands, would
hardly be buried, and therefore lost, unless they could be easily
replaced. The chiefs undoubtedly rode to battle; the deposits are full
of horse-trappings. On the whole, we may imagine the armies which
conquered Britain as being more or less like those of the Homeric
Greeks. The nucleus consisted of the king and his retinue, with a
larger or smaller following of nobles and their retainers equipped with
mailshirt, helmet, and shield, and armed with sword and spear. Though
they rode to war, they probably, with few exceptions, fought on foot.
Whether their peasantry were regarded as fighting men is doubtful.
Professor Chadwick thinks that they were not. In that case the conquest
of England was effected by armies consisting of chiefs with larger or
smaller bands of well-armed followers combined into armies under kings
or generals. Perhaps only when they had gained a firm foothold in the
country did the English bring over their peasant retainers and serfs
to till the land, while the fighting men protected them or carried out
further conquests. The frequent gaps in the war-bands may have been
filled up partly by levies from the peasantry, partly by adventurers
from all sides. Success must have brought many of the latter to the
English standards.

Having said so much, we will proceed to give, as far as is possible,
a sketch of the conquest; but the reader must be warned that it is
largely conjecture. The skeleton narrative which follows has been
constructed with care, after study and comparison of the earliest
authorities--Gildas, Nennius, and Bede, and the few other early
medival chroniclers who notice Britain--but probably there is hardly a
statement which is not open to criticism.

At first the invaders appear to have come rather as bands of raiders
than as conquering armies, but Gildas implies that some of them, at
least, dashed right across the island to the Irish Sea. His lurid
descriptions of the destruction of towns may be taken for what they
are worth; it is to be noted that he does not name one of them. He
appears to say that the shrine of St. Alban had been destroyed, but as
it almost certainly lay outside Verulam, it need not be assumed that
the town shared its fate. As a fact, judging from what occurred on the
Continent, walled towns were able to defy large hosts of barbarians.

No doubt the raids were destructive enough, and Gildas, despite his
exasperating style, probably does not overstate the misery in those
districts which were wasted by the marauders. But it is certainly rash
to deduce from his narrative that the whole of Eastern Britain up to
the central watershed, including all the important Roman towns, was
conquered and ruined within a few years after 450. The archological
evidence is of the scantiest. The sites of the greater Roman towns are
almost all built upon. Calleva and Venta Silurum were small places and
of no special importance. The site of Verulam has scarcely been touched.

It is needless to say that all maps of Britain at this period are
purely conjectural. There is no real clue as to the lines of advance of
the invaders. The probability is that they made their way inland along
the rivers. After a time the bands are found coalescing into armies;
for this must be the meaning of Bedes statement that Aella, whose
coming is placed by the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle in 477, was the first
Bretwalda. The chronology is, of course, worthless, but that Aella
really did command the English host for a time is highly probable. His
main sphere of action is said by the Chronicle to have been Sussex; but
probably, commanding as he did an army whose base was the sea, he had
other fields of operations. His chief exploit is said to have been the
storm of Anderida (Pevensey) in 491, according to the Chronicle, but
probably earlier. He, with his son Cissa, beset Anderida, and slew all
that were therein, nor was there afterwards one Briton left.

The Britons, according to Gildas, were for a while unable to make any
effective resistance to the attacks of their enemies, who were being
steadily reinforced from oversea; but after a weary time of ravage and
defeat, a Roman (Romanized Briton) named Ambrosius Aurelianus, perhaps
a son of the Ambrosius who had opposed Vortigern, took the lead. The
plan of accepting the suzerainty of Kymric dynasts for the sake of
peace and unity had led to disaster, and men were ready to rally to
one who stood for Roman traditions. Ambrosius succeeded in organizing
an effective resistance, and the result seems to have been that he was
acknowledged as king in the south at least. The Historia Brittonum
states that Vortigerns son Pascentius was subject to him, and in the
Welsh traditions he appears as Emrys Gwledig.

Nevertheless, the success was only partial. It appears certain that
the Teutons were firmly established on the eastern coast as well as in
Kent and Sussex. Ambrosius fought against them incessantly with varying
fortune all through his reign, but if he confined them to the territory
which they had already won, and checked their raids inland, it was as
much as he could do. The invaders base was the sea, and they could
attack when and where they pleased; we do not hear, nor is it probable,
that Ambrosius succeeded in organizing a navy, and no other means could
have definitely checked the advance. On the other hand, Ambrosius
probably had to some extent the advantage which unity of command gives,
while his opponents operations would often be disunited and erratic.
In the midst of the struggle Ambrosius died.

His gallant efforts appear to have produced important results. Not
only was he able to pass on his power to his descendants, as Gildas
witnesses, but a more or less united resistance was kept up against
the invaders. In the place of Ambrosius the cities and kings appear
to have chosen as Commander-in-chief, or _Dux Bellorum_, a certain
Artorius, famed in legend as King Arthur. He may or may not have been
the immediate successor of Aurelianus; perhaps here again Geoffrey of
Monmouth had some authority for interposing a third figure between the
two, though Uther looks suspiciously like a variation of Arthur.
Artorius may have been a relation of Ambrosius.

At any rate, his leadership was signalized by a long succession of
victories. The Historia Brittonum gives the rather suspicious round
number of twelve, but as it is obtained by there having been four
battles in the same locality, there is no obvious reason for doubting
it.

The first battle was at the mouth of the river Gleni; the second,
third, fourth, and fifth on the river Dubglas, in the region Linuis;
the sixth on the river Bassas; the seventh in Celidon Wood. The eighth
was at Gwinnion Castle, and in this fight it is especially noted that
Arthurs standard was an image or picture of the Virgin. The ninth
battle was at the City-of-the-Legion, the tenth on the Ribruit or
Tribruit, and the eleventh on a mountain called Agned. The twelfth
was at Mount Badon, and in it Arthur is credited with the slaughter,
single-handed, of nine hundred and sixty Saxons!

Of these twelve engagements the field of the seventh is practically
certain. Coit Celidon must be the Caledonian Forest (on the upper
Forth). This fixes some of the battles at least as fought in the north;
and this is rendered more probable, because one recension of the
Historia says that the Virgin of Gwinnion was afterwards deposited at
Wedale, near Melrose. The Gleni may be the Glen in Northumberland. The
Dubglas must clearly have been a most important strategic point if four
battles were fought there.

[Illustration: THE PASS THROUGH THE LAMMERMUIRS.

  The extraordinary network of fortifications indicates the vast
      strategic importance in the past of this highway between
      the Lothians and north-eastern England. The broken black
      lines indicate localities now under cultivation, and where,
      consequently, the fortifications are no longer obvious.]

If the first batch of battles occurred in the north, it is fair to
assume that they were fought against the Angles, and this practically
fixes them in the north-east. There is good reason for believing that
the Angles had very early established themselves in this quarter.
Now, it is worthy of note that there is to-day a streamlet called
the Dunglass at the entrance of Cockburnspath, the pass through the
eastern corner of the Lammermuirs, south-east of Dunbar, which played
an important part in the Great Civil War over eleven centuries later.
Cockburnspath is just the place at which one might expect battles
between rival forces moving from north to south and _vice versa_. The
hills around are still covered with the remains of fortifications,
many apparently of great antiquity. It may be that the course of the
war in this neighbourhood was as follows: The English moving south
from their settlements on the Firth of Forth were met and defeated by
Arthur, perhaps on the Glen, and retreated to Cockburnspath. After a
succession of engagements, they were driven thence, again defeated on
the Bassas (locality unknown), and finally pursued into the Caledonian
Forest.

The seat of war then appears to shift southward. Gwinnion may have been
fought to drive off some of the invaders who had got into the rear of
the Britons while the latter were fighting at the Forth. Urbs Legionis
is probably in this instance York. The Ribruit and Agned cannot be
identified; Mons Badonis or Badonicus is supposed to have been Bath,
but there is no reason for this identification; it probably arose out
of the similarity between Badon and the English appellation of Aquae
Sulis. Wadon Hill, near Avebury, and Badbury (? Baden-burh) Rings in
Dorset have both been identified with this mysterious site. It seems
from Gildas that it was a fortress. Probably it was besieged by the
invaders, and relieved by Arthur in a battle which stayed the English
advance for many years.

[Illustration: BRITAIN FROM ABOUT 500-570.

  Showing the probable effects of the Romano-British rally under
      Ambrosius Aurelianus and his successors. No towns are indicated
      within the English areas, as it is probable that all had been
      deserted or destroyed.]

The date of these events is doubtful. Gildas, in a sentence which is
the despair of all Latinists, seems to say that the battle of Mons
Badonicus was fought forty-four years and one month before he wrote his
book. We know that he wrote some years before the death of King Mlgwn
of Gwynedd (A.D. 547). This fixes the date of the battle at about 500.
The Annales Cambri put it in 516, but the Annales are as late as
the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle. Mr. E. B. Nicholson has suggested that the
forty-four years are to be reckoned from the appearance of Ambrosius
to 516. It is quite possible that the great leader did commence his
campaigns about 472, but Gildas hardly gives us the impression of a man
capable of very accurate chronology. But if he were born on the day of
the battle, as he says, it would be a simple matter. On the whole, we
may reasonably say that the battle was fought about the year 500, and
its effect was to stay the advance of the English in the south for at
least forty-four years.

One would willingly hear more of the men whose efforts for a while
stayed the flowing English tide; but practically all that is known is
here set down. The Annales Cambri state that twenty-one years after
Mons Badonicus Arthur and Medrant fell in a battle at Camlan. Arthur is
repeatedly mentioned in the bardic poems of Wales, but we cannot tell
to what extent these works may have been altered in later ages.

Whatever the fate of Arthur, and whatever the extent and nature of
his influence in Britain, his victories staved off ruin for half a
century, but no longer. The curse of Britain was that there were too
many dynasts for ever warring among themselves. The picture that Gildas
has painted may be highly coloured, but there is no reason to doubt
that when the danger appeared to be over, the old tribal quarrels
began again. Strathclyde and Reged were divided among the different
branches of the Houses of Coroticus and Coel. About 540 the energetic
but unscrupulous and dissolute Mlgwn, King of Gwynedd, succeeded in
getting rid of his related competitors. He may also have asserted a
primacy in the south and west, for Gildas calls him Insularis Draco
(Island Dragon), though it is true that this may simply refer to the
fact that the seat of the Cunedda dynasty was at Aberffraw in Mona.
Gildas overwhelms him with turgid invective and garbled quotations
from Scripture--in fact, his so-called history is, on the face of it,
nothing but a sermon directed at Mlgwn. He also denounces two other
Welsh dynasts--Vortipore of the Demet, and Cuneglass of Powys(?), and
two princes with Latin names--Constantinus of Damnonia and Aurelius
Caninus. The first name of the latter suggests that he may have been
one of those degenerate grandsons of Ambrosius Aurelianus of whom
Gildas speaks.

It is in the interval between Mons Badonicus and 577 that the Saxon
Chronicle places the conquest of Wessex. To discuss this matter in
detail would be to occupy far more space than is here available, but
it may be said, in short, that there is every reason to believe that
the Chronicles chronology is wrong; that it is highly improbable
that the West Saxons ever came up Southampton Water, the shores of
which were occupied by Jutes at an early date; finally, that Cerdic
is a very doubtful figure. The West Saxons were also, and commonly,
called Gewiss, the Confederates. Cerdic is a Celtic name; it is,
indeed, the same as Coroticus, or Caradoc, and this fact, coupled
with the curious name of the kingdom, suggests that Cerdic may have
been a Celtic prince, who founded a kingdom with the aid of English
mercenaries or allies, and became so identified with them that his
origin was forgotten. The latest opinion is that Wessex did not start
from Hampshire at all. Some of the battles mentioned--_i.e._, that with
Natan-leod--may be authentic, but they were the work of Jutes. Any
delimitation of the territory occupied by the invaders at the time must
necessarily be a very vague one; but it is probable that when Gildas
wrote they fell into three sections. South of the Thames--largely south
of the Weald--a long English-Jutish strip of territory stretched from
Southampton Water to Thanet, never reaching far inland except in Kent,
which was solidly occupied, and, perhaps, always the wealthiest of the
new States.

North of the Thames indications are even vaguer. Professor Oman is of
opinion that all the Romano-British cities in Eastern Britain perished
very early, mainly on the authority of Gildas, who appears to give a
picture of a Celtic Britain which does not extend anywhere towards the
east coast.

To attempt to make any definite geographical deductions from a writer
so vague as Gildas is rash; as a fact, we know that his five dynasts
are only some of several, and the territory of one of them who bears
the most suggestive name of all is not specified. Aurelius Caninus
may just as well have been king of London and Verulam as of Glevum,
Corinium, and Aqu Sulis. Opinion is steadily trending in the
direction of a belief in the continuous existence of London through the
lost centuries. This is too great a question to discuss here, but on
practical military grounds it may be pointed out that London, strongly
fortified, apparently populous, and situated astride of a great river,
was eminently fitted to be the curb of a barbarian invasion. There is
also to be considered the curious fact that the country round London
was called Middlesex, as if it at one time formed a sort of buffer
between East and West Saxons. The name certainly seems to show that
London and its territory became English late.

The English north of the Thames possibly lay north and east of a line
drawn from Leicester to the mouth of the Thames. If so, their abode
corresponded roughly to the later Danelaw. They probably formed, like
the Vikings, a confused mingling of petty kingdoms, earldoms, and the
camps of war bands. What was going on north of the Humber is not known,
but certainly the Bernician Angles in Lothian were fighting hard with
the British kingdoms of Strathclyde and Reged. Not until 547 did they
take Bamborough. The beginnings of Deira were probably still later;
it is not at all certain that the English had as yet any footing in
Yorkshire. Had a second Ambrosius Aurelianus or Artorius arisen to
coerce the warring British states into unity, the English settlements
might have been conquered, as were those of the Danes by Alfred and
Eadward I.

This was not to be. About 540 the Anglian settlements were fast
increasing in strength. The whole Angel-cynn, in fact, were streaming
over to Britain every year as fast as their ships could take them.
Probably they were forced on by the disorder in Europe, and the
pressure caused by the migrating Slavs and the raiding Avars with their
kindred tribes. At any rate, about 550 we find the English once more on
the move, and this time the Britons had no Ambrosius or Arthur to save
them.

About 547 King Ida of Bernicia took Dinguardi, soon to be Bebban-burh,
and began to push southward in the teeth of a desperate resistance from
the Britons of Reged under King Dutigern. The struggle was celebrated
in the songs of the great bards, Talhrn, Aneurin, Taliesin, and
Llywarch. Ida left twelve sons, several of whom reigned after him.
The most celebrated was the fierce raider Theudric--Flamddwyn, the
Burner, as the Britons called him. After much fighting, he was
completely defeated by Urien of Reged, and forced to take refuge on
Lindisfarne. But Urien was murdered by his own jealous kinsfolk in the
hour of victory, and Theudric, reinforced by new Anglian war bands, was
able to take the offensive again. The murder of Urien seems to have
broken the British power. His son Owen was slain by the Burner, and
Theudric ranged up and down the country, wasting it mercilessly, and
finally establishing English Bernicia so strongly that it was never
again in peril (_circa_ A.D. 570).

Meanwhile, in the south, too, about 571, the English had begun a fresh
advance under Ceawlin, the first authentic king of the Gewiss or
West Saxons. He probably commanded a large confederate army collected
from all the English states between Humber and Thames. A great battle
was fought at Bedford. The English were completely victorious, and
conquered the whole of the south-east Midlands as far as the Thames.
The towns captured are given their English names by the Anglo-Saxon
Chronicle, which is only to be expected; by the ninth century their
Roman appellations had vanished. The effect of the victory would
naturally be to leave London isolated. Possibly it maintained its
independence for some time, but by 596 it was certainly included in
Essex or Kent. Perhaps it had been in alliance with Kent for some time,
for Ceawlin had hostilities with the young King Aethelberht, and the
possession of London may have been the _casus belli_.

The battle of Bedford firmly established the kingdom of the Gewiss,
and Ceawlin probably extended his sway southward to the Weald and the
New Forest. Perhaps it was now that Calleva was finally abandoned. The
confines of the Britons were narrowed, and the last seats of the old
Roman civilization (if it had not by now entirely disappeared) were
about to fall into the hands of the English.

In 577 Ceawlin went westward, perhaps from Calleva, with the whole host
of the Gewiss. At Deorham, probably Derham, north of Bath, he met a
confederate British army under three kings--Conmail, Farinmail, and
Condidan. The last name may perhaps be read (Aurelius) Candidianus.
The English victory was complete; the three kings were slain; Glevum,
Corinium, and Aqu Sulis, together with the whole valley of the lower
Severn, fell into the hands of the conquerors.

Ceawlins later fortune was not equal to that of his earlier days. He
was defeated in an attempt to penetrate Wales, and his motley host
then revolted and deposed him. The Gewissan state became subject
to Aethelberht of Kent, who now succeeded to Ceawlins position of
Bretwalda. Nevertheless, Ceawlin had done his work; the battle of
Deorham was the most decisive struggle in the war which won Britain for
the English.

North of the Humber, after the death of Aethelric, the last of Idas
sons, Aethelfrith, the son of Aethelric, became king of Bernicia about
593. He made himself supreme also over Deira, and in 603 gained a most
complete and decisive victory over a confederation of Strathclydian
and Regedian Britons, Scots, and Irish from Ulster, under Aedan, King
of the Scots of Dalriada. The result was the destruction of Reged,
which survived only in a few scattered fragments, and the consolidation
of English power in the north. Then, in 613, the Northumbrian king
advanced upon Deva; a glance at the map will show his admirable
strategy. Bedes half-sorrowful praise of him (he was a heathen) was
evidently well deserved.

[Illustration: BRITAIN ABOUT 613.

  Showing the effects of the victorious campaigns of Ceawlin and
      Aethelfrith. The line of the Anglo-British frontier was
      extremely vague, and the indications are therefore only
      approximate.]

Before Deva there gathered for battle Cadwan, King of Gwynedd, the
most powerful of the Kymric princes; Brochmail, King of Theyrnllwg;
and Selim, perhaps Prince of Powys. Near Deva lay the great monastery
of Bangor Iscoed, with its 2,100 monks; and, after spending three days
in prayer and fasting, 1,200 of the latter accompanied the Britons
to the field. They stood apart, and a detachment of warriors under
Brochmail guarded them. Aethelfrith watched the gestures and movements
of the strange company, and the sound of their chants and prayers
floated across to him. They bear not arms, he said to his chiefs,
but our enemies they be, for their imprecations assail us. Slay them
first. The grim order was obeyed. Brochmail and his followers were
put to flight; the monks were butchered ruthlessly, and then, having
disposed of supernatural enmity, the English turned to fight their
secular adversaries. The battle was long and desperately contested, and
Bede says that Aethelfriths army suffered severely; but it ended in
another great English victory. Two British kings were slain; Cadwan and
Brochmail fled with only a remnant of their army.

Aethelfrith did not live to complete the conquest of the north; he
died in civil strife four years later. But the battles of Deorham and
Deva ensured the complete conquest of Britain. The British states were
hopelessly parted from one another, and could never again combine for
resistance, even had they the will to do so. They were, in 620, as
their foes had been in 520, cut into disconnected masses. Worse still,
they occupied wild and barren territories, and the dynastic conditions
did not make for internal peace. Nor did they ever again produce a
really great leader. After Deorham and Deva there was never any real
hope of recovering the lost ground, and to Ceawlin and Aethelfrith this
result was almost entirely due.

Inadequate and nebulous as this narrative of the events of a period
of such vital importance to the English nation may appear, yet out of
it there stand forth certain clearly-defined epochs and figures. The
invaders at first only plundered, until an apparently chance incident
opened the way to permanent settlement. For a time the tide of conquest
and occupation was checked by the series of brilliant victories gained
by Ambrosius and Arthur, but the civil broils of the Britons prevented
any permanent success over the continually multiplying enemy; and with
the advent of two really great leaders on the side of the invaders, the
older inhabitants found themselves hopelessly penned up in the barren
regions of the west. Thenceforth Britain was Britain no longer, but
Angle-land--England.




CHAPTER V

THE VIKING RAVAGES


From 596, the year of the coming of St. Augustine, to 793, England
was practically untroubled by foreign invasion, except in so far as
the raids of the still independent Kymry come under that heading. The
period was by no means peaceful; the three great kingdoms--Northumbria,
Mercia, and Wessex--were frequently at strife, and once or twice the
Welsh interfered with effect in their wars. Wessex was nearly always
torn with intestine war. After 758 the condition of Northumbria was one
of chronic anarchy.

In 793 Mercia, under the great Offa, the friend of Charles the Great,
was the suzerain state of England, supreme over all the English and
Welsh kingdoms south of the Humber. Northumbria was ruled by thelred,
son of thelwald (known as Moll), a savage tyrant who, however,
appears to have been capable of keeping order, if only by force, in
his anarchic realm. He was in alliance with Offa, whose daughter
lflaed he married, and also with Charles the Great; and his position
seemed fairly secure when, in 793, a squadron of pirate-ships sacked
Lindisfarne. Next year the descent was repeated, and Bedes monastery
at Jarrow was sacked. The pirate squadron was, however, shattered by a
storm, and its leader taken and put to death.

[Illustration: A VIKING WARRIOR.

The details are taken from objects in the British Museum.]

The raiders were Scandinavians--Vikings,[B] as they have come to be
called, from the fact that their settlements, though scattered all over
the Baltic region, lay thickest in the viks (fjords), and especially
along the shores of the great Vik, the Skager-Rak and Christiania
Fjord. All these communities were ready, on slight pretext, to take to
warfare and plunder, and leaders were never wanting. Politics, economic
conditions, and mere half-savage love of adventure, all played their
part in driving them seaward; and once the Vikings had tasted plunder,
desire of more soon led them far afield.

    [B] The i in Viking is short.

The Scandinavians were as yet heathens, and were to continue so
for long centuries. They were not altogether barbarians, despite
the savagery which appears so terribly in their deeds. Their social
condition was well developed, and they were not without a tincture
of civilized culture and art. In metal-work their achievements were
notable.

They had long been renowned as boat-builders. Tacitus especially notes
their proficiency in that science. It does not appear, however, that
they took any part in the Teutonic attacks on the Roman Empire, but in
515 a Danish chief named Hygelac raided the coast of Frankland. He was
defeated and slain by Theudebert I.

It was, perhaps, the conquest of the Saxons by Charles the Great which
alarmed the Danes into attacking Christendom. Before 793 scarcely
anything is heard of hostility from them. But Denmark, bordering on
Saxony, naturally became the refuge of the Saxon chiefs, and was
gradually drawn into the conflict. About 800 King Godfrid took up a
position of open hostility to the new Roman Emperor of the West. In
808 Charles apparently meditated an invasion of Denmark, and in 810
a Danish fleet of two hundred sail ravaged Frisia. Two years later
Godfrid prepared to invade the Frankish Empire, but was assassinated.
His successor sued for terms, and Charles the Great died in peace.

Nevertheless, the impulse had been given, and from 793 onward Viking
ravages began to afflict Europe. For many years they were confined
mainly to Ireland, which was wasted almost from sea to sea, the
result being, of course, that its brilliant art and literature were
steadily destroyed. The wasters of Ireland appear to have been chiefly
Norwegians; Denmark was involved in civil war. Frankland, no doubt,
appeared too powerful to annoy with impunity. England also seemed
strong. The raids of 793-794 were directed on anarchic Northumbria.

However, in 834 the Danish civil wars were at an end. The Danish king
was the savage Horik, Fel Christianitatis--the Gall of Christianity.
In Frankland the kindly but weak Emperor Ludwig the Pious was
engaged in civil war with his sons. In England the Mercian supremacy
had come to an end, and had been succeeded by that of Ecgberht of
Wessex. The opportunity appeared to have come, and the Danes, backed by
adventurers from all Scandinavia, began a series of terrible ravages in
Western Europe. First, as with the English attacks on Britain, there
were isolated plundering descents; then larger and better organized
expeditions; finally, great hosts migrating for purposes of settlement.

Such terms as great must here be taken in a relative sense.
Scandinavia is to-day the most thinly-peopled region of Europe; a
thousand years ago its population was far scantier.

The Viking ships were long open boats, raised at bow and stern, steered
by a paddle fastened to the starboard quarter. They had one mast with a
square sail, but were normally propelled by oars. In size they varied.
At first they were certainly small, and though excellent in the fjords,
were of little use for rough sea work. Doubtless the Scandinavian
builders soon discovered this, and began to develop their craft, until
they turned out Olaf Tryggvasons _Long Serpent_, the wonder of the
North. But the average number of men to each ship can hardly have
exceeded sixty, and it is doubtful whether the Vikings in England ever
collected more than 10,000 men in one field.

[Illustration: THE OSEBERG DRAGON SHIP.

(_From the Museum at Christiania._)]

The hosts were heterogeneous, unstable, and ill-disciplined, liable to
disown an unlucky or unpopular chief at a moments notice.

The Vikings, however, began with at least three advantages. It is
doubtful if the early English were ever, except from necessity, a
maritime people. In any case, it is clear that in the ninth century
they had almost entirely forgotten the nautical qualities of their
ancestors, and that no English state possessed warships. The Franks
appear to have allowed such squadrons as Charles the Great had
constructed to check the Danes to decay.

Secondly, neither in England nor Frankland was there as yet any real
sense of national union. The various English states were jealous and
disunited. Wessex was slow to aid Mercia, and Northumbria, apart from
its anarchic condition, disliked both. Concerted action was almost
an impossibility. Even more so was this the case in Frankland. The
Vikings, on landing, could generally rely upon having to meet only the
local levies.

Thirdly, the invaders had for a long time at least an immense tactical
superiority. They were for the most part trained fighting men,
physically powerful, brave, ferocious, thoroughly inured to war and
bloodshed, well equipped with arms offensive and defensive. The only
troops on the English side equal to them were the thegns and the
royal bodyguard, and the Vikings could easily rout superior numbers of
the ill-trained and ill-equipped country folk.

In 834 the Danes landed at the mouth of the Rhine and sacked Utrecht
and Dorstadt. A detachment of this fleet ran across to Sheppey and
made a hasty raid. In 836 they again wasted the delta of the Rhine,
and thirty-five ships sailed down the English Channel to Charmouth, in
Dorset. King Ecgberht came hastily against them, probably with only
his personal following, and fought a bloody action. The Danes held
their own, but apparently immediately re-embarked; at any rate, no more
is heard of them. But a repulse inflicted on the Bretwalda of England
by only the crews of thirty-five ships was an ominous event.

Two years later a Viking fleet touched in Cornwall. This last remnant
of Damnonia had lately been subjugated by Ecgberht, and at once joined
the invaders against him. The united forces, however, had scarcely
time to unite on Hengestesdune (Hingston Down), west of the Tamar,
when Ecgberht was upon them. They were entirely defeated. Cornwall was
reconquered, and the old king returned home in triumph, to die in the
following year.

He was succeeded by his son Aethelwulf, a curious counterpart of
his contemporary the Frankish Emperor, Ludwig the Pious--brave and
just, but weak and over-conscientious, and cursed, like Ludwig, with
undutiful sons and turbulent vassals. His troubles were soon upon him.
In 840 a Viking fleet appeared on the south coast, and its land force
fought an indecisive action with Wulfheard, Ealdorman of Hampshire,
near Southampton. The raiders next landed on Portland, defeated and
slew Aethelhelm, Ealdorman of Dorset, and sailed away with much booty.

[Illustration: SCANDINAVIAN WEAPONS AND OTHER OBJECTS IN THE BRITISH
MUSEUM.

  1 and 2. Swords--the usual length is about 3 feet. 3, 4, and
      5. Axe-heads from Norway. 6. A stirrup with inlaid spiral
      ornament, found in the Thames at Battersea. 7. Restored silver
      cup from Trewhiddle, St. Austell, Cornwall, about 6 inches
      high. 8 and 11. Spear or lance heads from Norway. 9. Axe-head
      from the Thames at Stanton Harcourt, about 7 inches wide. 10.
      Brooch from Goldsborough, Yorks.]

Next year another squadron came into the Wash, defeated and slew
Herebert, Ealdorman of Lindsey, wasted his territory, and then
ravaged the coasts of East Anglia and Kent.

In 842 a great Viking fleet sailed into the Channel, and, apparently
separating into detachments, attacked Quentovic in Picardy, London, and
Rochester. These places seem to have ransomed themselves. In the next
year a force landed once more at Charmouth, and repulsed Aethelwulf as
they had repulsed his father, though, as they left Wessex alone for
four years, it is to be assumed that they had lost heavily. In 844 a
squadron touched probably in the Humber, and killed Redwulf, King of
unhappy Northumbria.

So far as the Vikings had any settled strategic plan, it was to seek
the point of least resistance. If they were beaten off in Frankland,
they turned on England, and _vice versa_. For two years after 844 they
were busy in France, and not until 846 are they found again landing
in England, this time at the mouth of the Parret, where they were
completely defeated by an English force, of which the most conspicuous
leader was Ealhstane, the warrior bishop of Sherborne. It is possible
that this band was composed of Norwegians from Ireland, for the main
body of the Vikings was ravaging in France.

But in 851 the stress of the attack fell upon England. First a band
landed in Devon, but was set upon by Ealdorman Ceorl and completely
defeated. A second force attacked Sandwich, and was also defeated
with heavy loss, including that of nine ships. But in the summer the
main Viking fleet--three hundred and fifty ships under a chief named
Rorik--came up the Thames. North Kent was wasted, and Canterbury taken
and sacked. The victorious Danes then pressed up the river to London.
Beorhtwulf, King of Mercia, was posted before the city, but he was
defeated, and London stormed and sacked. Presumably its Roman walls
were ruinous. The Vikings, flushed with success, pushed on to attack
Wessex. Aethelwulf had failed to succour Beorhtwulf at London, but
had now assembled the army of Wessex, and was advancing against the
invaders. At Aclea (probably Oakley, near Basingstoke; see Appendix
A) Northmen and Englishmen for the first time encountered in a great
battle, and the Vikings were totally defeated. The greater part of
their army was destroyed, the survivors fled to their ships. The fame
of the victory went all over Western Europe, and its effect in England
was to strengthen the suzerainty of Wessex.

[Illustration: IRON-HAFTED BATTLE-AXE FOUND AT WINCHESTER.

Now in Westgate Museum, Winchester.]

In 853 a Viking force entrenched itself in Thanet and defeated an
attempt of the Kentishmen to dislodge them, but then abandoned the
isle and sailed to fields where plunder was more easily gained than
among the obstinate Englishmen. But in 854 they were again in England,
and wintered in Sheppey; and Aethelwulf chose the next year to go
on pilgrimage to Rome! His son Aethelbald seized the opportunity
to practically oust his father--not without some justification in
Aethelwulfs ill-timed religious enthusiasm. When the king came back
he was content to acknowledge his son as king in Wessex, keeping only
Kent, Sussex, and Essex for himself. The result of this dissension was,
of course, a serious weakening of the suzerain power of Wessex.

Aethelwulf died in 858. His successor, the rebellious Aethelbald,
reigned only two and a half years, and was then succeeded by his
brother Aethelbert, who held the sceptre for six years. There were
sporadic Viking raids at intervals after 855, but it was not until
860 that the danger again became serious. In that year a large Viking
fleet, under a chief named Vlund, was bribed to depart from France by
the wretched Charles the Bald, and forthwith turned its dragon prows
towards England. It sailed up Southampton Water, and its crews landed
and marched upon Winchester. Its walls were ruinous, and it was taken
and sacked; but immediately afterwards the Vikings were attacked by
the men of Berkshire and Hampshire, under the Ealdormen Aethelwulf and
Osric, and totally routed. This success of a hurried assemblage of
country-folk shows that the military efficiency of the Wessex peasants
was not to be despised.

For some five years the Northmen left England alone, but in 865 a
great horde descended on Kent. An attempt was made to buy them off, and
an armistice was declared, but they broke the truce and ravaged eastern
Kent before assistance could be brought from Wessex. They then settled
down for the winter in Thanet. Next spring King Aethelbert died, and
was succeeded by his brother Aethelred I.

The success of 865 had apparently determined the whole Viking swarm
in France to come over to England. Whether their leaders had any
definite design of settlement it is impossible to ascertain, but
the deliberation of their movements shows that they were carefully
calculated. The people of Wessex had shown themselves to be warlike
and patriotic, and its kings by no means despicable opponents. So the
Great Army poured into East Anglia, where they desisted from plunder
after receiving a heavy subsidy, but wintered in the unhappy country
and swept up its horses, so as to be able to move swiftly.

Very early in 867 the Great Army swarmed out of East Anglia and
passed through Eastern Mercia into Northumbria, which was torn between
two claimants to the throne--Osbeorht and lla. The Northmen poured
over the Humber and captured and sacked York, despite the fact that
it was fortified--perhaps the walls of the Roman _castra_ had been
patched up. lla and Osbeorht thereupon, with surprising patriotism,
came to terms and advanced together to recover York. The Northmen
were driven back and forced to shut themselves up in the city, and
the Northumbrians, impetuously pursuing, became involved in furious
street-fighting and met with hideous disaster. Both kings were slain;
the flower of the army perished in the streets and during the Viking
pursuit; only a remnant escaped.

This annihilating defeat resulted in the destruction of Northumbria.
For some years Deira remained in a miserable condition, in the power
of the Northmen but not regularly ruled by them. North of the Tyne,
for about ten years, some obscure princes called themselves kings at
Bamborough.

Emboldened by this success, the greatest that any Viking host had
hitherto gained, the Great Army next year, under Ingvar and Hubba,
sons of Ragnar Lodbrog, invaded Mercia from Deira and pushed up
the Trent. King Aethelred of Wessex marched to the relief of his
nominal vassal, Burhred of Mercia, and the two kings confronted the
Danes before they had penetrated beyond Nottingham. It was the first
positive sign of that hearty co-operation between the states in which
lay the only hope of salvation; but on this occasion it was not very
successful. The Northmen held out stoutly in Nottingham, and finally
in the autumn a truce was concluded by which they agreed to leave
Mercia in the spring if they were permitted to winter there without
molestation. Whether they received a subsidy is unknown; it is at least
possible.

During 869 the Army streamed back to York, and it was now, perhaps,
that they began to think of settling. But their restless and predatory
instincts could not die down quickly, and in 870 the bulk of the
host set forth again, rode over Mercia into East Anglia, and made
their winter quarters at Thetford. The great monasteries of the
Fens, Peterborough, Ely, Crowland, and Bardney, went up in flames,
and Eadmund of East Anglia, taken prisoner after a vain attempt at
resistance, was murdered in cold blood. Though there is no authority
earlier than Abbo (_circa_ 980), the story is probably true, for
shortly afterwards one finds his memory honoured, and churches raised
to him by the very men who had murdered him, which could hardly have
happened unless they had been deeply impressed by his heroic end. All
East Anglia and Essex were soon in Danish hands, and the Great Army
prepared to advance against Wessex.

Ingvar and Hubba now pass from the scene, though Hubba reappears for
a brief space some years later. The army that marched upon Wessex was
led by Halfdene, another son of Ragnar, a second king named Baegsceg,
and several jarls--a division of command which could hardly make for
efficiency.

The defence of Wessex was in capable hands. The gallant King Aethelred
was admirably assisted by his brother Alfred,[C] soon to be the
greatest of English kings. Everything possible appears to have been
done to facilitate mobilization, for the Wessex men were in the
field with the least delay. Better still, there was no standing on
the defensive; the royal brothers appear determined from the first to
attack their foes and drive them out of the country.

    [C] The name Alfred has become so much a part of English
        history that the time-honoured orthography is retained.

The Danish army advanced from Thetford to the Thames, contemptuously
ignoring Mercia, and entrenched itself at Reading in the triangle
formed by the junction of the Kennet with the Thames. The kings appear
to have established this camp while the jarls began to ravage. But they
were quickly to learn that they could not play the game with impunity.
Three days after their arrival two of the jarls were attacked by the
Berkshire _fyrd_, under Ealdorman Aethelwulf, at Englefield Green,
in Windsor Forest, and defeated; one of them was slain. Four days
afterwards the King and Alfred arrived at Reading unexpectedly with the
army of Wessex. The Northmen were off their guard, and were driven back
within the palisades. But when the English attempted to storm the camp
they were heavily repulsed, with the loss of the brave Aethelwulf, and
obliged to retreat westward.

The Viking host pursued. The retreat and pursuit went on for four days,
until Aethelred and Alfred had called in reinforcements sufficient to
enable them to fight again. Somewhere on Aesc-Dune (Ashdown)--_i.e._,
the Berkshire Downs, a great battle was fought. It is impossible to
locate the field; all that can be said is that it must have been a long
distance west of Reading. The plan of the battle itself is quite clear,
but the movements which preceded it are by no means so. It would
appear that the army of Wessex, coming from the south or south-east,
was halting before breasting the slopes of Aescdune when the Vikings
suddenly crowned the heights. They were in two masses, one led by the
kings, the other by the jarls. The English were also in two divisions,
commanded respectively by Aethelred and Alfred. Alfred was already at
the front, and he apparently made up his mind that it was far better
to meet than to await a downhill charge. He gave the word for the
whole army to advance, and informed his brother, who was hearing Mass
in the rear. Aethelred, perhaps because he knew that matters were
quite safe in his brothers hands, and because at the price of a few
minutes absence from the field he was quite ready to enhearten his
superstitious followers by a little pious posing, declined to come
until service was over. The story is probably true. Asser distinctly
says that he had excellent authority for it, very likely that of Alfred
himself.

The English uphill charge had the best effect. The Vikings were brought
to a stand, and the fight raged furiously on the slopes of Aescdune,
the focus of the fray being a stunted thorn, the only tree on the
hillside. Alfreds tactical insight had its reward, and the day went
steadily in favour of the English. King Baegsceg and five jarls were
slain, and the Northmen broke and fled headlong. They were pursued all
night and into the next day, and Asser says that many thousands of
them were slain.

It is sad to record that this splendid victory had no results.
Halfdene and the surviving jarls succeeded in reaching Reading, and
only a few days later they were joined by large reinforcements from
the Continent. Thus recruited, Halfdene again took the offensive, and
fourteen days after Aescdune was able to fight Aethelred at Basing,
this time with success. Still no decisive victory had been gained,
and two months later the armies are found confronting one another at
Marden, near Hungerford. Evidently the Northmen were still confined
to the neighbourhood of Reading. The army of Wessex was formed in two
divisions as at Aescdune, and for a great part of the day had the
advantage, but in the end the Northmen were victorious. Aethelred
himself was perhaps mortally wounded; certainly he died a few days
after. His death would have been an irreparable loss but that his great
brother was at hand to take up his sword.

The Northmen were now advancing into the heart of Wessex, and so heavy
had been the losses in the campaign that it was a task of exceeding
difficulty to reorganize the army. About a month after Marden Alfred
took up a position at Wilton with the small force which he had been
able to collect. Says Asser: The Saxons had been worn out by eight
battles in one year against the pagans, of whom they had slain one
king, nine dukes, and innumerable troops of soldiers. Alfred and his
little army made a gallant resistance, and for long beat back the
assaults of their enemies; but the favourite Viking stratagem of a
feigned retreat and a counter-attack turned the day against them.
Defeated, and with the Northmen in the heart of his ancestral kingdom,
Alfred was forced to sue for terms. The invaders also had suffered
very severely, and were ready to depart for a time to some other more
promising field of plunder. Asser and the Chronicle merely say that
Alfred made peace with the pagans. We must assume that they were bought
off with a subsidy. The respite could not be a long one--the Northmen
of the ninth and tenth centuries were the most perjured of mankind--but
Alfred might be trusted to turn the interval in the fighting to the
best advantage.

The position of England at the end of 871 could scarcely have been
worse. The results of the lack of national unity were terribly
apparent. Northumbria and East Anglia had practically disappeared from
the roll of English kingdoms; Mercia was tottering. Only Wessex had
succeeded in retaining its independence, and was still ready to fight
fiercely for liberty. The situation was similar to what it had been
four centuries before, when the first assaults of the English, after
occupying the east, were checked by Ambrosius and Artorius. But while
the British leaders left no successors worthy of them, it was otherwise
with Ecgberht and Aethelwulf. The youngest son of the latter was to be
the greatest and noblest of English kings, and to pass on his sceptre
to successors worthy of his name.




CHAPTER VI

ALFRED AND THE SAVING OF WESSEX


The stubborn resistance of Aethelred and Alfred had for the moment
saved Wessex; but its immediate effect was to throw the whole force
of the Northmen upon the rest of England. The host with which Alfred
had been contending withdrew to London, and there it stayed through
the winter. A most remarkable fact is that while there Halfdene minted
coins, bearing his own name indeed, but distinctively Roman in type. In
873 the unhappy Burhred of Mercia subsidized the invaders to depart,
but, as usual, they only shifted their quarters. This time they settled
down at Torksey, in Lindsey. A second tribute induced them to move
again, but with grim humour they now went forward into the very heart
of Mercia and encamped at Repton, near Nottingham. This finally broke
the spirit of Burhred, who, in despair, fled to Rome, where he died not
long afterwards as a monk. The Danish host thereupon set up a puppet
king of their own, in the person of Coelwulf, whom the Chronicle calls
an unwise kings thegn, and Asser a certain foolish minister. With
them he concluded a miserable arrangement, to the effect that when they
called upon him he was to resign to them such of his lands as they
needed to settle upon. So in utter ignominy the kingdom which had once
been the greatest of the English states dragged out its few remaining
years.

[Illustration: End View.

  PLANKS TAKEN FROM A NINTH-CENTURY WAR VESSEL SUNK IN THE HAMBLE
      RIVER, PERHAPS BY ALFRED THE GREAT.

  End and side views of portion of a ship, 130 feet in length,
      excavated near Warsash on the River Hamble. The planks were
      caulked with moss, now almost fossilized.

(_Now in West Gate Museum, Winchester._)]

The Great Army now separated. One division under Halfdene went
northward to complete the conquest of Northumbria. He wintered on the
Tyne (875-876), and harried Bernicia, Strathclyde, and the lands beyond
the Forth, now beginning to be known as Scotland, from the nationality
of its reigning royal house. In 876 he took up his abode as king at
York. Deira was parcelled out among the chiefs and warriors, and the
Danish kingdom of York came into being. Bernicia was not annexed; it
paid tribute, but lasted on--in a miserable fashion indeed--under the
High-Reeves of Bamborough until better days arrived.

The rest of the Vikings--a vast force, says the Chronicle--under three
war-kings, Guthrum, Oskytel and Amund, wintered at Cambridge, where
they appear to have been joined by fresh bands from abroad. Indeed,
seeing that there is no record of Viking ravages either in France or
Ireland for some years after 873, it seems that there was something
like a grand concentration of all the Scandinavian pirate bands
against Wessex. Aethelweard distinctly states that they had planned
their attack in conjunction with the Viking hosts that were tormenting
Ireland.

For four years Alfred had been unmolested by the Vikings, and had,
beyond doubt, been working hard at the reorganization of his defences.
Probably his military reforms were on the line of those which he
effected later--recruiting the thegnhood, the military class, which
was bound to follow the King to war, improving the arrangements
for mobilizing the _land-fyrd_, and fortifying the chief towns and
strategic points. But he did more than this. With a farsightedness
which raises him above all early medival Western monarchs, save
Charles the Great, he saw that the only sure way to curb the Vikings
was to meet them at sea, and began to build a fleet. Under the date
875 the Chronicle says: This summer went lfred the King out to sea
with an armed fleet, and fought with seven pirate ships. One he took,
and the others dispersed. That obscure sea-skirmish has a hallowed
interest, for it was the first victory of the world-conquering British
Navy.

But as yet Alfreds great reforms were in their infancy; his plans were
only traced out, not yet executed. The flood was rising, and burst
over devoted Wessex before the barriers which were to stay it had been
raised.

[Illustration:

  AN ANGLO-SAXON WEARING A HELMET OF LEATHER STRENGTHENED WITH METAL
      BANDS.]

As soon as the season permitted, the Great Army left Cambridge,
made a night march to the Thames, and crossing it unopposed, rushed
by forced marches across Wessex to Wareham, in Dorsetshire. It is to
be noted that Winchester was avoided; evidently it had been fortified
since the sack of 860. At Wareham the Danes were well placed for
attacks on Wessex, and for a junction with their allies from Ireland,
who came up immediately afterwards with a fleet of 120 ships. But
Alfred was as prompt as his foes, and scarcely had the Vikings effected
their junction when he blockaded Wareham with a large army. The result
was that the Danes could only effect some sporadic raids of Dorset by
sea. They finally extricated themselves by an act of treachery. They
opened negotiations, and Alfred was ready to buy them off. Every year
of immunity from pillage gained was to his advantage. The Viking chiefs
swore a peculiarly solemn oath to observe the fact on a sacred ring or
bracelet. Having thus thrown their enemies off their guard, the whole
mounted part of the host sallied out from their entrenchments, cut
their way through Alfreds lines, and dashed through Dorset into Devon.
Alfred, leaving part of his force to continue the blockade, promptly
pursued, and finally besieged his treacherous foes in Exeter.

We hear nothing all this time of naval operations, but now Asser
appears to imply that an English squadron assisted in the blockade of
Exeter. The Danes at Wareham embarked early in 877 on the ships from
Ireland in order to join their comrades, but the fleet was caught in a
storm and cast ashore near Swanage. Scarce a ship escaped, and almost
all the crews were drowned or massacred. The army in Exeter was now
isolated, and late in the summer, having exhausted its provisions,
offered to treat. They gave him as many and as great hostages as he
demanded, and swore solemn oaths to observe strictest friendship.
They retired to Cirencester.

The wretched Coelwulf II. was now called upon to surrender his kingdom,
according to the ignominious treaty of 874, and the Northmen proceeded
to settle down. Ultimately they occupied the whole of Mercia, east of a
line extending roughly from Macclesfield to Oxford; but probably only a
beginning of the settlement was made in this year. A large portion of
the host remained at Cirencester under Guthrum, and it now, in defiance
of its solemn engagements, concerted a fresh attack on Alfred with the
Vikings of Ireland. A force of the latter, under Hubba, was in South
Wales, and communication was easy. The levies of Wessex had dispersed
after their long service. Alfred was keeping his New Year festivities
when the stunning tidings came that the treacherous horde had stolen
from Cirencester into Wessex, and was entrenching itself at Chippenham.
Defence was impossible. Raiding bands at once began to burn and waste
the heart out of the astounded peasantry; the foul treachery and
suddenness of the attack made its success complete. It seemed as if all
were lost. Many districts submitted; many people fled terror-stricken
to France.

Yet it was but for a moment. Amid the panic and confusion there were
brave men who kept their heads. The King, with his immediate following,
retreated to the Isle of Athelney, in the marshes of the Parret, and
there entrenched himself. His position was inaccessible, and he was
able to rally the levies of the neighbourhood, and to commence a series
of counter-attacks on the Danish raiding columns. Aethelnoth, Ealdorman
of Somerset, succeeded in collecting some more of his country levies,
and entrenched himself in the woods, while Ealdorman Odda gathered the
men of North Devon at Cynuit, perhaps, as tradition indicates, Kenwith,
or Henniborough (? Cynuit-burh), near Bideford. In the west, at least,

