foolish eare

   Rosin. My Lord, you must tell vs where the body is,
and go with vs to the King

   Ham. The body is with the King, but the King is not
with the body. The King, is a thing-
  Guild. A thing my Lord?
  Ham. Of nothing: bring me to him, hide Fox, and all
after.

Exeunt.

Enter King.

  King. I haue sent to seeke him, and to find the bodie:
How dangerous is it that this man goes loose:
Yet must not we put the strong Law on him:
Hee's loued of the distracted multitude,
Who like not in their iudgement, but their eyes:
And where 'tis so, th' Offenders scourge is weigh'd
But neerer the offence: to beare all smooth, and euen,
This sodaine sending him away, must seeme
Deliberate pause, diseases desperate growne,
By desperate appliance are releeued,
Or not at all.
Enter Rosincrane.

How now? What hath befalne?
  Rosin. Where the dead body is bestow'd my Lord,
We cannot get from him

   King. But where is he?
  Rosin. Without my Lord, guarded to know your
pleasure

   King. Bring him before vs

   Rosin. Hoa, Guildensterne? Bring in my Lord.
Enter Hamlet and Guildensterne.

  King. Now Hamlet, where's Polonius?
  Ham. At Supper

   King. At Supper? Where?
  Ham. Not where he eats, but where he is eaten, a certaine
conuocation of wormes are e'ne at him. Your worm
is your onely Emperor for diet. We fat all creatures else
to fat vs, and we fat our selfe for Magots. Your fat King,
and your leane Begger is but variable seruice to dishes,
but to one Table that's the end

   King. What dost thou meane by this?
  Ham. Nothing but to shew you how a King may go
a Progresse through the guts of a Begger

   King. Where is Polonius

   Ham. In heauen, send thither to see. If your Messenger
finde him not there, seeke him i'th other place your
selfe: but indeed, if you finde him not this moneth, you
shall nose him as you go vp the staires into the Lobby

   King. Go seeke him there

   Ham. He will stay till ye come

   K. Hamlet, this deed of thine, for thine especial safety
Which we do tender, as we deerely greeue
For that which thou hast done, must send thee hence
With fierie Quicknesse. Therefore prepare thy selfe,
The Barke is readie, and the winde at helpe,
Th' Associates tend, and euery thing at bent
For England

   Ham. For England?
  King. I Hamlet

   Ham. Good

   King. So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes

   Ham. I see a Cherube that see's him: but come, for
England. Farewell deere Mother

   King. Thy louing Father Hamlet

   Hamlet. My Mother: Father and Mother is man and
wife: man & wife is one flesh, and so my mother. Come,
for England.

Exit

  King. Follow him at foote,
Tempt him with speed aboord:
Delay it not, Ile haue him hence to night.
Away, for euery thing is Seal'd and done
That else leanes on th' Affaire, pray you make hast.
And England, if my loue thou holdst at ought,
As my great power thereof may giue thee sense,
Since yet thy Cicatrice lookes raw and red
After the Danish Sword, and thy free awe
Payes homage to vs; thou maist not coldly set
Our Soueraigne Processe, which imports at full
By Letters coniuring to that effect
The present death of Hamlet. Do it England,
For like the Hecticke in my blood he rages,
And thou must cure me: Till I know 'tis done,
How ere my happes, my ioyes were ne're begun.

Exit

Enter Fortinbras with an Armie.

  For. Go Captaine, from me greet the Danish King,
Tell him that by his license, Fortinbras
Claimes the conueyance of a promis'd March
Ouer his Kingdome. You know the Rendeuous:
If that his Maiesty would ought with vs,
We shall expresse our dutie in his eye,
And let him know so

   Cap. I will doo't, my Lord

   For. Go safely on.
Enter.

Enter Queene and Horatio.

  Qu. I will not speake with her

   Hor. She is importunate, indeed distract, her moode
will needs be pittied

   Qu. What would she haue?
  Hor. She speakes much of her Father; saies she heares
There's trickes i'th' world, and hems, and beats her heart,
Spurnes enuiously at Strawes, speakes things in doubt,
That carry but halfe sense: Her speech is nothing,
Yet the vnshaped vse of it doth moue
The hearers to Collection; they ayme at it,
And botch the words vp fit to their owne thoughts,
Which as her winkes, and nods, and gestures yeeld them,
Indeed would make one thinke there would be thought,
Though nothing sure, yet much vnhappily

   Qu. 'Twere good she were spoken with,
For she may strew dangerous coniectures
In ill breeding minds. Let her come in.
To my sicke soule (as sinnes true Nature is)
Each toy seemes Prologue, to some great amisse,
So full of Artlesse iealousie is guilt,
It spill's it selfe, in fearing to be spilt.
Enter Ophelia distracted.

  Ophe. Where is the beauteous Maiesty of Denmark

   Qu. How now Ophelia?
  Ophe. How should I your true loue know from another one?
By his Cockle hat and staffe, and his Sandal shoone

   Qu. Alas sweet Lady: what imports this Song?
  Ophe. Say you? Nay pray you marke.
He is dead and gone Lady, he is dead and gone,
At his head a grasse-greene Turfe, at his heeles a stone.
Enter King.

  Qu. Nay but Ophelia

   Ophe. Pray you marke.
White his Shrow'd as the Mountaine Snow

   Qu. Alas, looke heere my Lord

   Ophe. Larded with sweet Flowers:
Which bewept to the graue did not go,
With true-loue showres

   King. How do ye, pretty Lady?
  Ophe. Well, God dil'd you. They say the Owle was
a Bakers daughter. Lord, wee know what we are, but
know not what we may be. God be at your Table

   King. Conceit vpon her Father

   Ophe. Pray you let's haue no words of this: but when
they aske you what it meanes, say you this:
To morrow is S[aint]. Valentines day, all in the morning betime,
And I a Maid at your Window, to be your Valentine.
Then vp he rose, & don'd his clothes, & dupt the chamber dore,
Let in the Maid, that out a Maid, neuer departed more

   King. Pretty Ophelia

   Ophe. Indeed la? without an oath Ile make an end ont.
By gis, and by S[aint]. Charity,
Alacke, and fie for shame:
Yong men wil doo't, if they come too't,
By Cocke they are too blame.
Quoth she before you tumbled me,
You promis'd me to Wed:
So would I ha done by yonder Sunne,
And thou hadst not come to my bed

   King. How long hath she bin thus?
  Ophe. I hope all will be well. We must bee patient,
but I cannot choose but weepe, to thinke they should
lay him i'th' cold ground: My brother shall knowe of it,
and so I thanke you for your good counsell. Come, my
Coach: Goodnight Ladies: Goodnight sweet Ladies:
Goodnight, goodnight.
Enter.

  King. Follow her close,
Giue her good watch I pray you:
Oh this is the poyson of deepe greefe, it springs
All from her Fathers death. Oh Gertrude, Gertrude,
When sorrowes comes, they come not single spies,
But in Battalians. First, her Father slaine,
Next your Sonne gone, and he most violent Author
Of his owne iust remoue: the people muddied,
Thicke and vnwholsome in their thoughts, and whispers
For good Polonius death; and we haue done but greenly
In hugger mugger to interre him. Poore Ophelia
Diuided from her selfe, and her faire Iudgement,
Without the which we are Pictures, or meere Beasts.
Last, and as much containing as all these,
Her Brother is in secret come from France,
Keepes on his wonder, keepes himselfe in clouds,
And wants not Buzzers to infect his eare
With pestilent Speeches of his Fathers death,
Where in necessitie of matter Beggard,
Will nothing sticke our persons to Arraigne
In eare and eare. O my deere Gertrude, this,
Like to a murdering Peece in many places,
Giues me superfluous death.

A Noise within.

Enter a Messenger.

  Qu. Alacke, what noyse is this?
  King. Where are my Switzers?
Let them guard the doore. What is the matter?
  Mes. Saue your selfe, my Lord.
The Ocean (ouer-peering of his List)
Eates not the Flats with more impittious haste
Then young Laertes, in a Riotous head,
Ore-beares your Officers, the rabble call him Lord,
And as the world were now but to begin,
Antiquity forgot, Custome not knowne,
The Ratifiers and props of euery word,
They cry choose we? Laertes shall be King,
Caps, hands, and tongues, applaud it to the clouds,
Laertes shall be King, Laertes King

   Qu. How cheerefully on the false Traile they cry,
Oh this is Counter you false Danish Dogges.

Noise within. Enter Laertes.

  King. The doores are broke

   Laer. Where is the King, sirs? Stand you all without

   All. No, let's come in

   Laer. I pray you giue me leaue

   Al. We will, we will

   Laer. I thanke you: Keepe the doore.
Oh thou vilde King, giue me my Father

   Qu. Calmely good Laertes

   Laer. That drop of blood, that calmes
Proclaimes me Bastard:
Cries Cuckold to my Father, brands the Harlot
Euen heere betweene the chaste vnsmirched brow
Of my true Mother

   King. What is the cause Laertes,
That thy Rebellion lookes so Gyant-like?
Let him go Gertrude: Do not feare our person:
There's such Diuinity doth hedge a King,
That Treason can but peepe to what it would,
Acts little of his will. Tell me Laertes,
Why thou art thus Incenst? Let him go Gertrude.
Speake man

   Laer. Where's my Father?
  King. Dead

   Qu. But not by him

   King. Let him demand his fill

   Laer. How came he dead? Ile not be Iuggel'd with.
To hell Allegeance: Vowes, to the blackest diuell.
Conscience and Grace, to the profoundest Pit.
I dare Damnation: to this point I stand,
That both the worlds I giue to negligence,
Let come what comes: onely Ile be reueng'd
Most throughly for my Father

   King. Who shall stay you?
  Laer. My Will, not all the world,
And for my meanes, Ile husband them so well,
They shall go farre with little

   King. Good Laertes:
If you desire to know the certaintie
Of your deere Fathers death, if writ in your reuenge,
That Soop-stake you will draw both Friend and Foe,
Winner and Looser

   Laer. None but his Enemies

   King. Will you know them then

   La. To his good Friends, thus wide Ile ope my Armes:
And like the kinde Life-rend'ring Politician,
Repast them with my blood

   King. Why now you speake
Like a good Childe, and a true Gentleman.
That I am guiltlesse of your Fathers death,
And am most sensible in greefe for it,
It shall as leuell to your Iudgement pierce
As day do's to your eye.

A noise within. Let her come in.

Enter Ophelia.

  Laer. How now? what noise is that?
Oh heate drie vp my Braines, teares seuen times salt,
Burne out the Sence and Vertue of mine eye.
By Heauen, thy madnesse shall be payed by waight,
Till our Scale turnes the beame. Oh Rose of May,
Deere Maid, kinde Sister, sweet Ophelia:
Oh Heauens, is't possible, a yong Maids wits,
Should be as mortall as an old mans life?
Nature is fine in Loue, and where 'tis fine,
It sends some precious instance of it selfe
After the thing it loues

   Ophe. They bore him bare fac'd on the Beer,
Hey non nony, nony, hey nony:
And on his graue raines many a teare,
Fare you well my Doue

   Laer. Had'st thou thy wits, and did'st perswade Reuenge,
it could not moue thus

   Ophe. You must sing downe a-downe, and you call
him a-downe-a. Oh, how the wheele becomes it? It is
the false Steward that stole his masters daughter

   Laer. This nothings more then matter

   Ophe. There's Rosemary, that's for Remembraunce.
Pray loue remember: and there is Paconcies, that's for
Thoughts

   Laer. A document in madnesse, thoughts & remembrance
fitted

   Ophe. There's Fennell for you, and Columbines: ther's
Rew for you, and heere's some for me. Wee may call it
Herbe-Grace a Sundaies: Oh you must weare your Rew
with a difference. There's a Daysie, I would giue you
some Violets, but they wither'd all when my Father dyed:
They say, he made a good end;
For bonny sweet Robin is all my ioy

   Laer. Thought, and Affliction, Passion, Hell it selfe:
She turnes to Fauour, and to prettinesse

   Ophe. And will he not come againe,
And will he not come againe:
No, no, he is dead, go to thy Death-bed,
He neuer wil come againe.
His Beard as white as Snow,
All Flaxen was his Pole:
He is gone, he is gone, and we cast away mone,
Gramercy on his Soule.
And of all Christian Soules, I pray God.
God buy ye.

Exeunt. Ophelia

  Laer. Do you see this, you Gods?
  King. Laertes, I must common with your greefe,
Or you deny me right: go but apart,
Make choice of whom your wisest Friends you will,
And they shall heare and iudge 'twixt you and me;
If by direct or by Colaterall hand
They finde vs touch'd, we will our Kingdome giue,
Our Crowne, our Life, and all that we call Ours
To you in satisfaction. But if not,
Be you content to lend your patience to vs,
And we shall ioyntly labour with your soule
To giue it due content

   Laer. Let this be so:
His meanes of death, his obscure buriall;
No Trophee, Sword, nor Hatchment o're his bones,
No Noble rite, nor formall ostentation,
Cry to be heard, as 'twere from Heauen to Earth,
That I must call in question

   King. So you shall:
And where th' offence is, let the great Axe fall.
I pray you go with me.

Exeunt.

Enter Horatio, with an Attendant.

  Hora. What are they that would speake with me?
  Ser. Saylors sir, they say they haue Letters for you

   Hor. Let them come in,
I do not know from what part of the world
I should be greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.
Enter Saylor.

  Say. God blesse you Sir

   Hor. Let him blesse thee too

   Say. Hee shall Sir, and't please him. There's a Letter
for you Sir: It comes from th' Ambassadours that was
bound for England, if your name be Horatio, as I am let
to know it is.

Reads the Letter.

Horatio, When thou shalt haue ouerlook'd this, giue these
Fellowes some meanes to the King: They haue Letters
for him. Ere we were two dayes old at Sea, a Pyrate of very
Warlicke appointment gaue vs Chace. Finding our selues too
slow of Saile, we put on a compelled Valour. In the Grapple, I
boorded them: On the instant they got cleare of our Shippe, so
I alone became their Prisoner. They haue dealt with mee, like
Theeues of Mercy, but they knew what they did. I am to doe
a good turne for them. Let the King haue the Letters I haue
sent, and repaire thou to me with as much hast as thou wouldest
flye death. I haue words to speake in your eare, will make thee
dumbe, yet are they much too light for the bore of the Matter.
These good Fellowes will bring thee where I am. Rosincrance
and Guildensterne, hold their course for England. Of them
I haue much to tell thee, Farewell.
He that thou knowest thine,
Hamlet.
Come, I will giue you way for these your Letters,
And do't the speedier, that you may direct me
To him from whom you brought them.
Enter.

Enter King and Laertes.

  King. Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,
And you must put me in your heart for Friend,
Sith you haue heard, and with a knowing eare,
That he which hath your Noble Father slaine,
Pursued my life

   Laer. It well appeares. But tell me,
Why you proceeded not against these feates,
So crimefull, and so Capitall in Nature,
As by your Safety, Wisedome, all things else,
You mainly were stirr'd vp?
  King. O for two speciall Reasons,
Which may to you (perhaps) seeme much vnsinnowed,
And yet to me they are strong. The Queen his Mother,
Liues almost by his lookes: and for my selfe,
My Vertue or my Plague, be it either which,
She's so coniunctiue to my life, and soule;
That as the Starre moues not but in his Sphere,
I could not but by her. The other Motiue,
Why to a publike count I might not go,
Is the great loue the generall gender beare him,
Who dipping all his Faults in their affection,
Would like the Spring that turneth Wood to Stone,
Conuert his Gyues to Graces. So that my Arrowes
Too slightly timbred for so loud a Winde,
Would haue reuerted to my Bow againe,
And not where I had arm'd them

   Laer. And so haue I a Noble Father lost,
A Sister driuen into desperate tearmes,
Who was (if praises may go backe againe)
Stood Challenger on mount of all the Age
For her perfections. But my reuenge will come

   King. Breake not your sleepes for that,
You must not thinke
That we are made of stuffe, so flat, and dull,
That we can let our Beard be shooke with danger,
And thinke it pastime. You shortly shall heare more,
I lou'd your Father, and we loue our Selfe,
And that I hope will teach you to imagine-
Enter a Messenger.

How now? What Newes?
  Mes. Letters my Lord from Hamlet, This to your
Maiesty: this to the Queene

   King. From Hamlet? Who brought them?
  Mes. Saylors my Lord they say, I saw them not:
They were giuen me by Claudio, he receiu'd them

   King. Laertes you shall heare them:
Leaue vs.

Exit Messenger

High and Mighty, you shall know I am set naked on your
Kingdome. To morrow shall I begge leaue to see your Kingly
Eyes. When I shall (first asking your Pardon thereunto) recount
th' Occasions of my sodaine, and more strange returne.
Hamlet.
What should this meane? Are all the rest come backe?
Or is it some abuse? Or no such thing?
  Laer. Know you the hand?
  Kin. 'Tis Hamlets Character, naked and in a Postscript
here he sayes alone: Can you aduise me?
  Laer. I'm lost in it my Lord; but let him come,
It warmes the very sicknesse in my heart,
That I shall liue and tell him to his teeth;
Thus diddest thou

   Kin. If it be so Laertes, as how should it be so:
How otherwise will you be rul'd by me?
  Laer. If so you'l not o'rerule me to a peace

   Kin. To thine owne peace: if he be now return'd,
As checking at his Voyage, and that he meanes
No more to vndertake it; I will worke him
To an exployt now ripe in my Deuice,
Vnder the which he shall not choose but fall;
And for his death no winde of blame shall breath,
But euen his Mother shall vncharge the practice,
And call it accident: Some two Monthes hence
Here was a Gentleman of Normandy,
I'ue seene my selfe, and seru'd against the French,
And they ran well on Horsebacke; but this Gallant
Had witchcraft in't; he grew into his Seat,
And to such wondrous doing brought his Horse,
As had he beene encorps't and demy-Natur'd
With the braue Beast, so farre he past my thought,
That I in forgery of shapes and trickes,
Come short of what he did

   Laer. A Norman was't?
  Kin. A Norman

   Laer. Vpon my life Lamound

   Kin. The very same

   Laer. I know him well, he is the Brooch indeed,
And Iemme of all our Nation

   Kin. Hee mad confession of you,
And gaue you such a Masterly report,
For Art and exercise in your defence;
And for your Rapier most especiall,
That he cryed out, t'would be a sight indeed,
If one could match you Sir. This report of his
Did Hamlet so envenom with his Enuy,
That he could nothing doe but wish and begge,
Your sodaine comming ore to play with him;
Now out of this

   Laer. Why out of this, my Lord?
  Kin. Laertes was your Father deare to you?
Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,
A face without a heart?
  Laer. Why aske you this?
  Kin. Not that I thinke you did not loue your Father,
But that I know Loue is begun by Time:
And that I see in passages of proofe,
Time qualifies the sparke and fire of it:
Hamlet comes backe: what would you vndertake,
To show your selfe your Fathers sonne indeed,
More then in words?
  Laer. To cut his throat i'th' Church

   Kin. No place indeed should murder Sancturize;
Reuenge should haue no bounds: but good Laertes
Will you doe this, keepe close within your Chamber,
Hamlet return'd, shall know you are come home:
Wee'l put on those shall praise your excellence,
And set a double varnish on the fame
The Frenchman gaue you, bring you in fine together,
And wager on your heads, he being remisse,
Most generous, and free from all contriuing,
Will not peruse the Foiles? So that with ease,
Or with a little shuffling, you may choose
A Sword vnbaited, and in a passe of practice,
Requit him for your Father

   Laer. I will doo't.
And for that purpose Ile annoint my Sword:
I bought an Vnction of a Mountebanke
So mortall, I but dipt a knife in it,
Where it drawes blood, no Cataplasme so rare,
Collected from all Simples that haue Vertue
Vnder the Moone, can saue the thing from death,
That is but scratcht withall: Ile touch my point,
With this contagion, that if I gall him slightly,
It may be death

   Kin. Let's further thinke of this,
Weigh what conuenience both of time and meanes
May fit vs to our shape, if this should faile;
And that our drift looke through our bad performance,
'Twere better not assaid; therefore this Proiect
Should haue a backe or second, that might hold,
If this should blast in proofe: Soft, let me see
Wee'l make a solemne wager on your commings,
I ha't: when in your motion you are hot and dry,
As make your bowts more violent to the end,
And that he cals for drinke; Ile haue prepar'd him
A Challice for the nonce; whereon but sipping,
If he by chance escape your venom'd stuck,
Our purpose may hold there; how sweet Queene.
Enter Queene.

  Queen. One woe doth tread vpon anothers heele,
So fast they'l follow: your Sister's drown'd Laertes

   Laer. Drown'd! O where?
  Queen. There is a Willow growes aslant a Brooke,
That shewes his hore leaues in the glassie streame:
There with fantasticke Garlands did she come,
Of Crow-flowers, Nettles, Daysies, and long Purples,
That liberall Shepheards giue a grosser name;
But our cold Maids doe Dead Mens Fingers call them:
There on the pendant boughes, her Coronet weeds
Clambring to hang; an enuious sliuer broke,
When downe the weedy Trophies, and her selfe,
Fell in the weeping Brooke, her cloathes spred wide,
And Mermaid-like, a while they bore her vp,
Which time she chaunted snatches of old tunes,
As one incapable of her owne distresse,
Or like a creature Natiue, and indued
Vnto that Element: but long it could not be,
Till that her garments, heauy with her drinke,
Pul'd the poore wretch from her melodious buy,
To muddy death

   Laer. Alas then, is she drown'd?
  Queen. Drown'd, drown'd

   Laer. Too much of water hast thou poore Ophelia,
And therefore I forbid my teares: but yet
It is our tricke, Nature her custome holds,
Let shame say what it will; when these are gone
The woman will be out: Adue my Lord,
I haue a speech of fire, that faine would blaze,
But that this folly doubts it.
Enter.

  Kin. Let's follow, Gertrude:
How much I had to doe to calme his rage?
Now feare I this will giue it start againe;
Therefore let's follow.

Exeunt.

Enter two Clownes.

  Clown. Is she to bee buried in Christian buriall, that
wilfully seekes her owne saluation?
  Other. I tell thee she is, and therefore make her Graue
straight, the Crowner hath sate on her, and finds it Christian
buriall

   Clo. How can that be, vnlesse she drowned her selfe in
her owne defence?
  Other. Why 'tis found so

   Clo. It must be Se offendendo, it cannot bee else: for
heere lies the point; If I drowne my selfe wittingly, it argues
an Act: and an Act hath three branches. It is an
Act to doe and to performe; argall she drown'd her selfe
wittingly

   Other. Nay but heare you Goodman Deluer

   Clown. Giue me leaue; heere lies the water; good:
heere stands the man; good: If the man goe to this water
and drowne himselfe; it is will he nill he, he goes;
marke you that? But if the water come to him & drowne
him; hee drownes not himselfe. Argall, hee that is not
guilty of his owne death, shortens not his owne life

   Other. But is this law?
  Clo. I marry is't, Crowners Quest Law

   Other. Will you ha the truth on't: if this had not
beene a Gentlewoman, shee should haue beene buried
out of Christian Buriall

   Clo. Why there thou say'st. And the more pitty that
great folke should haue countenance in this world to
drowne or hang themselues, more then their euen Christian.
Come, my Spade; there is no ancient Gentlemen,
but Gardiners, Ditchers and Graue-makers; they hold vp
Adams Profession

   Other. Was he a Gentleman?
  Clo. He was the first that euer bore Armes

   Other. Why he had none

   Clo. What, ar't a Heathen? how doth thou vnderstand
the Scripture? the Scripture sayes Adam dig'd;
could hee digge without Armes? Ile put another question
to thee; if thou answerest me not to the purpose, confesse
thy selfe-
  Other. Go too

   Clo. What is he that builds stronger then either the
Mason, the Shipwright, or the Carpenter?
  Other. The Gallowes maker; for that Frame outliues a
thousand Tenants

   Clo. I like thy wit well in good faith, the Gallowes
does well; but how does it well? it does well to those
that doe ill: now, thou dost ill to say the Gallowes is
built stronger then the Church: Argall, the Gallowes
may doe well to thee. Too't againe, Come

   Other. Who builds stronger then a Mason, a Shipwright,
or a Carpenter?
  Clo. I, tell me that, and vnyoake

   Other. Marry, now I can tell

   Clo. Too't

   Other. Masse, I cannot tell.
Enter Hamlet and Horatio a farre off.

  Clo. Cudgell thy braines no more about it; for your
dull Asse will not mend his pace with beating; and when
you are ask't this question next, say a Graue-maker: the
Houses that he makes, lasts till Doomesday: go, get thee
to Yaughan, fetch me a stoupe of Liquor.

Sings.

In youth when I did loue, did loue,
me thought it was very sweete:
To contract O the time for a my behoue,
O me thought there was nothing meete

   Ham. Ha's this fellow no feeling of his businesse, that
he sings at Graue-making?
  Hor. Custome hath made it in him a property of easinesse

   Ham. 'Tis ee'n so; the hand of little Imployment hath
the daintier sense

   Clowne sings. But Age with his stealing steps
hath caught me in his clutch:
And hath shipped me intill the Land,
as if I had neuer beene such

   Ham. That Scull had a tongue in it, and could sing
once: how the knaue iowles it to th' grownd, as if it
were Caines Iaw-bone, that did the first murther: It
might be the Pate of a Polititian which this Asse o're Offices:
one that could circumuent God, might it not?
  Hor. It might, my Lord

   Ham. Or of a Courtier, which could say, Good Morrow
sweet Lord: how dost thou, good Lord? this
might be my Lord such a one, that prais'd my Lord such
a ones Horse, when he meant to begge it; might it not?
  Hor. I, my Lord

   Ham. Why ee'n so: and now my Lady Wormes,
Chaplesse, and knockt about the Mazard with a Sextons
Spade; heere's fine Reuolution, if wee had the tricke to
see't. Did these bones cost no more the breeding, but
to play at Loggets with 'em? mine ake to thinke
on't

   Clowne sings. A Pickhaxe and a Spade, a Spade,
for and a shrowding-Sheete:
O a Pit of Clay for to be made,
for such a Guest is meete

   Ham. There's another: why might not that bee the
Scull of a Lawyer? where be his Quiddits now? his
Quillets? his Cases? his Tenures, and his Tricks? why
doe's he suffer this rude knaue now to knocke him about
the Sconce with a dirty Shouell, and will not tell him of
his Action of Battery? hum. This fellow might be in's
time a great buyer of Land, with his Statutes, his Recognizances,
his Fines, his double Vouchers, his Recoueries:
Is this the fine of his Fines, and the recouery of his Recoueries,
to haue his fine Pate full of fine Dirt? will his
Vouchers vouch him no more of his Purchases, and double
ones too, then the length and breadth of a paire of
Indentures? the very Conueyances of his Lands will
hardly lye in this Boxe; and must the Inheritor himselfe
haue no more? ha?
  Hor. Not a iot more, my Lord

   Ham. Is not Parchment made of Sheep-skinnes?
  Hor. I my Lord, and of Calue-skinnes too

   Ham. They are Sheepe and Calues that seek out assurance
in that. I will speake to this fellow: whose Graue's
this Sir?
  Clo. Mine Sir:
O a Pit of Clay for to be made,
for such a Guest is meete

   Ham. I thinke it be thine indeed: for thou liest in't

   Clo. You lye out on't Sir, and therefore it is not yours:
for my part, I doe not lye in't; and yet it is mine

   Ham. Thou dost lye in't, to be in't and say 'tis thine:
'tis for the dead, not for the quicke, therefore thou
lyest

   Clo. 'Tis a quicke lye Sir, 'twill away againe from me
to you

   Ham. What man dost thou digge it for?
  Clo. For no man Sir

   Ham. What woman then?
  Clo. For none neither

   Ham. Who is to be buried in't?
  Clo. One that was a woman Sir; but rest her Soule,
shee's dead

   Ham. How absolute the knaue is? wee must speake
by the Carde, or equiuocation will vndoe vs: by the
Lord Horatio, these three yeares I haue taken note of it,
the Age is growne so picked, that the toe of the Pesant
comes so neere the heeles of our Courtier, hee galls his
Kibe. How long hast thou been a Graue-maker?
  Clo. Of all the dayes i'th' yeare, I came too't that day
that our last King Hamlet o'recame Fortinbras

   Ham. How long is that since?
  Clo. Cannot you tell that? euery foole can tell that:
It was the very day, that young Hamlet was borne, hee
that was mad, and sent into England

   Ham. I marry, why was he sent into England?
  Clo. Why, because he was mad; hee shall recouer his
wits there; or if he do not, it's no great matter there

   Ham. Why?
  Clo. 'Twill not be seene in him, there the men are as
mad as he

   Ham. How came he mad?
  Clo. Very strangely they say

   Ham. How strangely?
  Clo. Faith e'ene with loosing his wits

   Ham. Vpon what ground?
  Clo. Why heere in Denmarke: I haue bin sixeteene
heere, man and Boy thirty yeares

   Ham. How long will a man lie i'th' earth ere he rot?
  Clo. Ifaith, if he be not rotten before he die (as we haue
many pocky Coarses now adaies, that will scarce hold
the laying in) he will last you some eight yeare, or nine
yeare. A Tanner will last you nine yeare

   Ham. Why he, more then another?
  Clo. Why sir, his hide is so tan'd with his Trade, that
he will keepe out water a great while. And your water,
is a sore Decayer of your horson dead body. Heres a Scull
now: this Scul, has laine in the earth three & twenty years

   Ham. Whose was it?
  Clo. A whoreson mad Fellowes it was;
Whose doe you thinke it was?
  Ham. Nay, I know not

   Clo. A pestilence on him for a mad Rogue, a pour'd a
Flaggon of Renish on my head once. This same Scull
Sir, this same Scull sir, was Yoricks Scull, the Kings Iester

   Ham. This?
  Clo. E'ene that

   Ham. Let me see. Alas poore Yorick, I knew him Horatio,
a fellow of infinite Iest; of most excellent fancy, he
hath borne me on his backe a thousand times: And how
abhorred my Imagination is, my gorge rises at it. Heere
hung those lipps, that I haue kist I know not how oft.
Where be your Iibes now? Your Gambals? Your
Songs? Your flashes of Merriment that were wont to
set the Table on a Rore? No one now to mock your own
Ieering? Quite chopfalne? Now get you to my Ladies
Chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch thicke, to this
fauour she must come. Make her laugh at that: prythee
Horatio tell me one thing

   Hor. What's that my Lord?
  Ham. Dost thou thinke Alexander lookt o'this fashion
i'th' earth?
  Hor. E'ene so

   Ham. And smelt so? Puh

   Hor. E'ene so, my Lord

   Ham. To what base vses we may returne Horatio.
Why may not Imagination trace the Noble dust of Alexander,
till he find it stopping a bunghole

   Hor. 'Twere to consider: to curiously to consider so

   Ham. No faith, not a iot. But to follow him thether
with modestie enough, & likeliehood to lead it; as thus.
Alexander died: Alexander was buried: Alexander returneth
into dust; the dust is earth; of earth we make
Lome, and why of that Lome (whereto he was conuerted)
might they not stopp a Beere-barrell?
Imperiall Caesar, dead and turn'd to clay,
Might stop a hole to keepe the winde away.
Oh, that that earth, which kept the world in awe,
Should patch a Wall, t' expell the winters flaw.
But soft, but soft, aside; heere comes the King.
Enter King, Queene, Laertes, and a Coffin, with Lords attendant.

The Queene, the Courtiers. Who is that they follow,
And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken,
The Coarse they follow, did with disperate hand,
Fore do it owne life; 'twas some Estate.
Couch we a while, and mark

   Laer. What Cerimony else?
  Ham. That is Laertes, a very Noble youth: Marke

   Laer. What Cerimony else?
  Priest. Her Obsequies haue bin as farre inlarg'd.
As we haue warrantie, her death was doubtfull,
And but that great Command, o're-swaies the order,
She should in ground vnsanctified haue lodg'd,
Till the last Trumpet. For charitable praier,
Shardes, Flints, and Peebles, should be throwne on her:
Yet heere she is allowed her Virgin Rites,
Her Maiden strewments, and the bringing home
Of Bell and Buriall

   Laer. Must there no more be done ?
  Priest. No more be done:
We should prophane the seruice of the dead,
To sing sage Requiem, and such rest to her
As to peace-parted Soules

   Laer. Lay her i'th' earth,
And from her faire and vnpolluted flesh,
May Violets spring. I tell thee (churlish Priest)
A Ministring Angell shall my Sister be,
When thou liest howling?
  Ham. What, the faire Ophelia?
  Queene. Sweets, to the sweet farewell.
I hop'd thou should'st haue bin my Hamlets wife:
I thought thy Bride-bed to haue deckt (sweet Maid)
And not t'haue strew'd thy Graue

   Laer. Oh terrible woer,
Fall ten times trebble, on that cursed head
Whose wicked deed, thy most Ingenious sence
Depriu'd thee of. Hold off the earth a while,
Till I haue caught her once more in mine armes:

Leaps in the graue.

Now pile your dust, vpon the quicke, and dead,
Till of this flat a Mountaine you haue made,
To o're top old Pelion, or the skyish head
Of blew Olympus

   Ham. What is he, whose griefes
Beares such an Emphasis? whose phrase of Sorrow
Coniure the wandring Starres, and makes them stand
Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,
Hamlet the Dane

   Laer. The deuill take thy soule

   Ham. Thou prai'st not well,
I prythee take thy fingers from my throat;
Sir though I am not Spleenatiue, and rash,
Yet haue I something in me dangerous,
Which let thy wisenesse feare. Away thy hand

   King. Pluck them asunder

   Qu. Hamlet, Hamlet

   Gen. Good my Lord be quiet

   Ham. Why I will fight with him vppon this Theme.
Vntill my eielids will no longer wag

   Qu. Oh my Sonne, what Theame?
  Ham. I lou'd Ophelia; fortie thousand Brothers
Could not (with all there quantitie of Loue)
Make vp my summe. What wilt thou do for her?
  King. Oh he is mad Laertes,
  Qu. For loue of God forbeare him

   Ham. Come show me what thou'lt doe.
Woo't weepe? Woo't fight? Woo't teare thy selfe?
Woo't drinke vp Esile, eate a Crocodile?
Ile doo't. Dost thou come heere to whine;
To outface me with leaping in her Graue?
Be buried quicke with her, and so will I.
And if thou prate of Mountaines; let them throw
Millions of Akers on vs; till our ground
Sindging his pate against the burning Zone,
Make Ossa like a wart. Nay, and thou'lt mouth,
Ile rant as well as thou

   Kin. This is meere Madnesse:
And thus awhile the fit will worke on him:
Anon as patient as the female Doue,
When that her Golden Cuplet are disclos'd;
His silence will sit drooping

   Ham. Heare you Sir:
What is the reason that you vse me thus?
I lou'd you euer; but it is no matter:
Let Hercules himselfe doe what he may,
The Cat will Mew, and Dogge will haue his day.
Enter.

  Kin. I pray you good Horatio wait vpon him,
Strengthen your patience in our last nights speech,
Wee'l put the matter to the present push:
Good Gertrude set some watch ouer your Sonne,
This Graue shall haue a liuing Monument:
An houre of quiet shortly shall we see;
Till then, in patience our proceeding be.

Exeunt.

Enter Hamlet and Horatio

   Ham. So much for this Sir; now let me see the other,
You doe remember all the Circumstance

   Hor. Remember it my Lord?
  Ham. Sir, in my heart there was a kinde of fighting,
That would not let me sleepe; me thought I lay
Worse then the mutines in the Bilboes, rashly,
(And praise be rashnesse for it) let vs know,
Our indiscretion sometimes serues vs well,
When our deare plots do paule, and that should teach vs,
There's a Diuinity that shapes our ends,
Rough-hew them how we will

   Hor. That is most certaine

   Ham. Vp from my Cabin
My sea-gowne scarft about me in the darke,
Grop'd I to finde out them; had my desire,
Finger'd their Packet, and in fine, withdrew
To mine owne roome againe, making so bold,
(My feares forgetting manners) to vnseale
Their grand Commission, where I found Horatio,
Oh royall knauery: An exact command,
Larded with many seuerall sorts of reason;
Importing Denmarks health, and Englands too,
With hoo, such Bugges and Goblins in my life,
That on the superuize no leasure bated,
No not to stay the grinding of the Axe,
My head should be struck off

   Hor. Ist possible?
  Ham. Here's the Commission, read it at more leysure:
But wilt thou heare me how I did proceed?
  Hor. I beseech you

   Ham. Being thus benetted round with Villaines,
Ere I could make a Prologue to my braines,
They had begun the Play. I sate me downe,
Deuis'd a new Commission, wrote it faire,
I once did hold it as our Statists doe,
A basenesse to write faire; and laboured much
How to forget that learning: but Sir now,
It did me Yeomans seriuce: wilt thou know
The effects of what I wrote?
  Hor. I, good my Lord

   Ham. An earnest Coniuration from the King,
As England was his faithfull Tributary,
As loue betweene them, as the Palme should flourish,
As Peace should still her wheaten Garland weare,
And stand a Comma 'tweene their amities,
And many such like Assis of great charge,
That on the view and know of these Contents,
Without debatement further, more or lesse,
He should the bearers put to sodaine death,
Not shriuing time allowed

   Hor. How was this seal'd?
  Ham. Why, euen in that was Heauen ordinate;
I had my fathers Signet in my Purse,
Which was the Modell of that Danish Seale:
Folded the Writ vp in forme of the other,
Subscrib'd it, gau't th' impression, plac't it safely,
The changeling neuer knowne: Now, the next day
Was our Sea Fight, and what to this was sement,
Thou know'st already

   Hor. So Guildensterne and Rosincrance, go too't

   Ham. Why man, they did make loue to this imployment
They are not neere my Conscience; their debate
Doth by their owne insinuation grow:
'Tis dangerous, when the baser nature comes
Betweene the passe, and fell incensed points
Of mighty opposites

   Hor. Why, what a King is this?
  Ham. Does it not, thinkst thee, stand me now vpon
He that hath kil'd my King, and whor'd my Mother,
Popt in betweene th' election and my hopes,
Throwne out his Angle for my proper life,
And with such coozenage; is't not perfect conscience,
To quit him with this arme? And is't not to be damn'd
To let this Canker of our nature come
In further euill

   Hor. It must be shortly knowne to him from England
What is the issue of the businesse there

   Ham. It will be short,
The interim's mine, and a mans life's no more
Then to say one: but I am very sorry good Horatio,
That to Laertes I forgot my selfe;
For by the image of my Cause, I see
The Portraiture of his; Ile count his fauours:
But sure the brauery of his griefe did put me
Into a Towring passion

   Hor. Peace, who comes heere?
Enter young Osricke.

  Osr. Your Lordship is right welcome back to Denmarke

   Ham. I humbly thank you Sir, dost know this waterflie?
  Hor. No my good Lord

   Ham. Thy state is the more gracious; for 'tis a vice to
know him: he hath much Land, and fertile; let a Beast
be Lord of Beasts, and his Crib shall stand at the Kings
Messe; 'tis a Chowgh; but as I saw spacious in the possession
of dirt

   Osr. Sweet Lord, if your friendship were at leysure,
I should impart a thing to you from his Maiesty

   Ham. I will receiue it with all diligence of spirit; put
your Bonet to his right vse, 'tis for the head

   Osr. I thanke your Lordship, 'tis very hot

   Ham. No, beleeue mee 'tis very cold, the winde is
Northerly

   Osr. It is indifferent cold my Lord indeed

   Ham. Mee thinkes it is very soultry, and hot for my
Complexion

   Osr. Exceedingly, my Lord, it is very soultry, as 'twere
I cannot tell how: but my Lord, his Maiesty bad me signifie
to you, that he ha's laid a great wager on your head:
Sir, this is the matter

   Ham. I beseech you remember

   Osr. Nay, in good faith, for mine ease in good faith:
Sir, you are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes is at
his weapon

   Ham. What's his weapon?
  Osr. Rapier and dagger

   Ham. That's two of his weapons; but well

   Osr. The sir King ha's wag'd with him six Barbary horses,
against the which he impon'd as I take it, sixe French
Rapiers and Poniards, with their assignes, as Girdle,
Hangers or so: three of the Carriages infaith are very
deare to fancy, very responsiue to the hilts, most delicate
carriages, and of very liberall conceit

   Ham. What call you the Carriages?
  Osr. The Carriages Sir, are the hangers

   Ham. The phrase would bee more Germaine to the
matter: If we could carry Cannon by our sides; I would
it might be Hangers till then; but on sixe Barbary Horses
against sixe French Swords: their Assignes, and three
liberall conceited Carriages, that's the French but against
the Danish; why is this impon'd as you call it?
  Osr. The King Sir, hath laid that in a dozen passes betweene
you and him, hee shall not exceed you three hits;
He hath one twelue for mine, and that would come to
imediate tryall, if your Lordship would vouchsafe the
Answere

   Ham. How if I answere no?
  Osr. I meane my Lord, the opposition of your person
in tryall

   Ham. Sir, I will walke heere in the Hall; if it please
his Maiestie, 'tis the breathing time of day with me; let
the Foyles bee brought, the Gentleman willing, and the
King hold his purpose; I will win for him if I can: if
not, Ile gaine nothing but my shame, and the odde hits

   Osr. Shall I redeliuer you ee'n so?
  Ham. To this effect Sir, after what flourish your nature
will

   Osr. I commend my duty to your Lordship

   Ham. Yours, yours; hee does well to commend it
himselfe, there are no tongues else for's tongue

   Hor. This Lapwing runs away with the shell on his
head

   Ham. He did Complie with his Dugge before hee
suck't it: thus had he and mine more of the same Beauty
that I know the drossie age dotes on; only got the tune of
the time, and outward habite of encounter, a kinde of
yesty collection, which carries them through & through
the most fond and winnowed opinions; and doe but blow
them to their tryalls: the Bubbles are out

   Hor. You will lose this wager, my Lord

   Ham. I doe not thinke so, since he went into France,
I haue beene in continuall practice; I shall winne at the
oddes: but thou wouldest not thinke how all heere about
my heart: but it is no matter

   Hor. Nay, good my Lord

   Ham. It is but foolery; but it is such a kinde of
gain-giuing as would perhaps trouble a woman

   Hor. If your minde dislike any thing, obey. I will forestall
their repaire hither, and say you are not fit

   Ham. Not a whit, we defie Augury; there's a speciall
Prouidence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be now, 'tis not
to come: if it bee not to come, it will bee now: if it
be not now; yet it will come; the readinesse is all, since no
man ha's ought of what he leaues. What is't to leaue betimes?
Enter King, Queene, Laertes and Lords, with other Attendants with
Foyles,
and Gauntlets, a Table and Flagons of Wine on it.

  Kin. Come Hamlet, come, and take this hand from me

   Ham. Giue me your pardon Sir, I'ue done you wrong,
But pardon't as you are a Gentleman.
This presence knowes,
And you must needs haue heard how I am punisht
With sore distraction? What I haue done
That might your nature honour, and exception
Roughly awake, I heere proclaime was madnesse:
Was't Hamlet wrong'd Laertes? Neuer Hamlet.
If Hamlet from himselfe be tane away:
And when he's not himselfe, do's wrong Laertes,
Then Hamlet does it not, Hamlet denies it:
Who does it then? His Madnesse? If't be so,
Hamlet is of the Faction that is wrong'd,
His madnesse is poore Hamlets Enemy.
Sir, in this Audience,
Let my disclaiming from a purpos'd euill,
Free me so farre in your most generous thoughts,
That I haue shot mine Arrow o're the house,
And hurt my Mother

   Laer. I am satisfied in Nature,
Whose motiue in this case should stirre me most
To my Reuenge. But in my termes of Honor
I stand aloofe, and will no reconcilement,
Till by some elder Masters of knowne Honor,
I haue a voyce, and president of peace
To keepe my name vngorg'd. But till that time,
I do receiue your offer'd loue like loue,
And wil not wrong it

   Ham. I do embrace it freely,
And will this Brothers wager frankely play.
Giue vs the Foyles: Come on

   Laer. Come one for me

   Ham. Ile be your foile Laertes, in mine ignorance,
Your Skill shall like a Starre i'th' darkest night,
Sticke fiery off indeede

   Laer. You mocke me Sir

   Ham. No by this hand

   King. Giue them the Foyles yong Osricke,
Cousen Hamlet, you know the wager

   Ham. Verie well my Lord,
Your Grace hath laide the oddes a'th' weaker side

   King. I do not feare it,
I haue seene you both:
But since he is better'd, we haue therefore oddes

   Laer. This is too heauy,
Let me see another

   Ham. This likes me well,
These Foyles haue all a length.

Prepare to play.

  Osricke. I my good Lord

   King. Set me the Stopes of wine vpon that Table:
If Hamlet giue the first, or second hit,
Or quit in answer of the third exchange,
Let all the Battlements their Ordinance fire,
The King shal drinke to Hamlets better breath,
And in the Cup an vnion shal he throw
Richer then that, which foure successiue Kings
In Denmarkes Crowne haue worne.
Giue me the Cups,
And let the Kettle to the Trumpets speake,
The Trumpet to the Cannoneer without,
The Cannons to the Heauens, the Heauen to Earth,
Now the King drinkes to Hamlet. Come, begin,
And you the Iudges beare a wary eye

   Ham. Come on sir

   Laer. Come on sir.

They play.

  Ham. One

   Laer. No

   Ham. Iudgement

   Osr. A hit, a very palpable hit

   Laer. Well: againe

   King. Stay, giue me drinke.
Hamlet, this Pearle is thine,
Here's to thy health. Giue him the cup,

Trumpets sound, and shot goes off.

  Ham. Ile play this bout first, set by a-while.
Come: Another hit; what say you?
  Laer. A touch, a touch, I do confesse

   King. Our Sonne shall win

   Qu. He's fat, and scant of breath.
Heere's a Napkin, rub thy browes,
The Queene Carowses to thy fortune, Hamlet

   Ham. Good Madam

   King. Gertrude, do not drinke

   Qu. I will my Lord;
I pray you pardon me

   King. It is the poyson'd Cup, it is too late

   Ham. I dare not drinke yet Madam,
By and by

   Qu. Come, let me wipe thy face

   Laer. My Lord, Ile hit him now

   King. I do not thinke't

   Laer. And yet 'tis almost 'gainst my conscience

   Ham. Come for the third.
Laertes, you but dally,
I pray you passe with your best violence,
I am affear'd you make a wanton of me

   Laer. Say you so? Come on.

Play.

  Osr. Nothing neither way

   Laer. Haue at you now.

In scuffling they change Rapiers.

  King. Part them, they are incens'd

   Ham. Nay come, againe

   Osr. Looke to the Queene there hoa

   Hor. They bleed on both sides. How is't my Lord?
  Osr. How is't Laertes?
  Laer. Why as a Woodcocke
To mine Sprindge, Osricke,
I am iustly kill'd with mine owne Treacherie

   Ham. How does the Queene?
  King. She sounds to see them bleede

   Qu. No, no, the drinke, the drinke.
Oh my deere Hamlet, the drinke, the drinke,
I am poyson'd

   Ham. Oh Villany! How? Let the doore be lock'd.
Treacherie, seeke it out

   Laer. It is heere Hamlet.
Hamlet, thou art slaine,
No Medicine in the world can do thee good.
In thee, there is not halfe an houre of life;
The Treacherous Instrument is in thy hand,
Vnbated and envenom'd: the foule practise
Hath turn'd it selfe on me. Loe, heere I lye,
Neuer to rise againe: Thy Mothers poyson'd:
I can no more, the King, the King's too blame

   Ham. The point envenom'd too,
Then venome to thy worke.

Hurts the King.

  All. Treason, Treason

   King. O yet defend me Friends, I am but hurt

   Ham. Heere thou incestuous, murdrous,
Damned Dane,
Drinke off this Potion: Is thy Vnion heere?
Follow my Mother.

King Dyes.

  Laer. He is iustly seru'd.
It is a poyson temp'red by himselfe:
Exchange forgiuenesse with me, Noble Hamlet;
Mine and my Fathers death come not vpon thee,
Nor thine on me.

Dyes.

  Ham. Heauen make thee free of it, I follow thee.
I am dead Horatio, wretched Queene adiew,
You that looke pale, and tremble at this chance,
That are but Mutes or audience to this acte:
Had I but time (as this fell Sergeant death
Is strick'd in his Arrest) oh I could tell you.
But let it be: Horatio, I am dead,
Thou liu'st, report me and my causes right
To the vnsatisfied

   Hor. Neuer beleeue it.
I am more an Antike Roman then a Dane:
Heere's yet some Liquor left

   Ham. As th'art a man, giue me the Cup.
Let go, by Heauen Ile haue't.
Oh good Horatio, what a wounded name,
(Things standing thus vnknowne) shall liue behind me.
If thou did'st euer hold me in thy heart,
Absent thee from felicitie awhile,
And in this harsh world draw thy breath in paine,
To tell my Storie.

March afarre off, and shout within.

What warlike noyse is this?
Enter Osricke.

  Osr. Yong Fortinbras, with conquest come fro[m] Poland
To th' Ambassadors of England giues this warlike volly

   Ham. O I dye Horatio:
The potent poyson quite ore-crowes my spirit,
I cannot liue to heare the Newes from England,
But I do prophesie th' election lights
On Fortinbras, he ha's my dying voyce,
So tell him with the occurrents more and lesse,
Which haue solicited. The rest is silence. O, o, o, o.

Dyes

  Hora. Now cracke a Noble heart:
Goodnight sweet Prince,
And flights of Angels sing thee to thy rest,
Why do's the Drumme come hither?
Enter Fortinbras and English Ambassador, with Drumme, Colours,
and
Attendants.

  Fortin. Where is this sight?
  Hor. What is it ye would see;
If ought of woe, or wonder, cease your search

   For. His quarry cries on hauocke. Oh proud death,
What feast is toward in thine eternall Cell.
That thou so many Princes, at a shoote,
So bloodily hast strooke

   Amb. The sight is dismall,
And our affaires from England come too late,
The eares are senselesse that should giue vs hearing,
To tell him his command'ment is fulfill'd,
That Rosincrance and Guildensterne are dead:
Where should we haue our thankes?
  Hor. Not from his mouth,
Had it th' abilitie of life to thanke you:
He neuer gaue command'ment for their death.
But since so iumpe vpon this bloodie question,
You from the Polake warres, and you from England
Are heere arriued. Giue order that these bodies
High on a stage be placed to the view,
And let me speake to th' yet vnknowing world,
How these things came about. So shall you heare
Of carnall, bloudie, and vnnaturall acts,
Of accidentall iudgements, casuall slaughters
Of death's put on by cunning, and forc'd cause,
And in this vpshot, purposes mistooke,
Falne on the Inuentors head. All this can I
Truly deliuer

   For. Let vs hast to heare it,
And call the Noblest to the Audience.
For me, with sorrow, I embrace my Fortune,
I haue some Rites of memory in this Kingdome,
Which are to claime, my vantage doth
Inuite me,
  Hor. Of that I shall haue alwayes cause to speake,
And from his mouth
Whose voyce will draw on more:
But let this same be presently perform'd,
Euen whiles mens mindes are wilde,
Lest more mischance
On plots, and errors happen

   For. Let foure Captaines
Beare Hamlet like a Soldier to the Stage,
For he was likely, had he beene put on
To haue prou'd most royally:
And for his passage,
The Souldiours Musicke, and the rites of Warre
Speake lowdly for him.
Take vp the body; Such a sight as this
Becomes the Field, but heere shewes much amis.
Go, bid the Souldiers shoote.

Exeunt. Marching: after the which, a Peale of Ordenance are shot
off.


FINIS. The tragedie of HAMLET, Prince of Denmarke.
The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Future of the Women's Movement, by Helena
M. (Helena Maria) Swanwick


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: The Future of the Women's Movement


Author: Helena M. (Helena Maria) Swanwick



Release Date: January 19, 2018  [eBook #56403]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FUTURE OF THE WOMEN'S
MOVEMENT***


E-text prepared by MWS and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made available by
Internet Archive (https://archive.org)



Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/futureofwomensmo00swan





THE FUTURE OF THE WOMENS MOVEMENT

by

H. M. SWANWICK, M.A.

With an Introduction by
Mrs. Fawcett, LL.D.
President of the National Union of WomenS Suffrage Societies






[Illustration]

London
G. Bell & Sons Ltd.
1913




TO F. T. S.




PREFACE


Women in the movement often wish that the word humanist had not been
appropriated, because it would far more properly connote the womens
movement than the word feminist.

It is significant of much that there is in the English language no
commonly used substantive corresponding to _homo_. There is need, of
course, for the words man and woman, but there is also need for a word
denoting the species, irrespective of sex, and I have been driven to make
use of a locution not common in English, in writing a human. But the
common pronoun is non-existent and I have not used the neuter, lest it
should alarm nervous persons. Perhaps when we have got over the panic
fear of unsexing ourselves, we may find it safe to speak of a human, just
as we do of a baby, as it.

There may seem to be a disappointing lack of prophesy in a book avowedly
dealing with the future; but since I believe the womens movement to be
a seeking for knowledge and good, to show what is reasonable and good
in the movement is to show what will persist and triumph. Through all
our faults and mistakes, we women are aiming at better understanding
and co-operation with men, and a better adaptation to one another of
conditions and persons. We are having to hammer out for ourselves the
right principles of government. We can take them ready-made from no man.
Doubtless we shall flounder considerably, as men have doneand do. But
there is little fear that in the long-run the best minds of men and women
will not have a common principle.

Meanwhile we have to resist the tendency to easy and cheap
generalisations about woman, her sphere, her vocation, and her capacity,
based upon a very small amount of very partial investigation and a huge
amount of inherited prejudice and native conceit. Men who ought to have
some respect for scientific methods will, when some _  priori_ theory
of womans proper sphere has closed their minds, make the most palpably
faulty deductions from imperfect data, and use their reputation in some
other branch of science as cover for their bad reasoning. No statistics
are more useful than vital statistics, and none have been more misused
to prove some foregone conclusion. Everyone experienced in investigation
knows how helpful it is to have some general hypothesis in view, by
which to co-ordinate all phenomena, but knows also how necessary it
is to be constantly watchful lest the hypothesis should obscure new
and unexpected phenomena. When the investigator is himself personally
involved, and when the hypothesis is one which the majority of men have
thought self-evident for ages, and when the strongest of all impulses,
next to hunger, confuses the mind of the investigator, we are justified
in being very sceptical about the positive nature of his conclusions,
until he can satisfy us that they have been reached by strictly logical
methods of agreement and difference.

If to some reasonable and civilised men it may seem that I have given
undue importance to the foolishnesses and barbarisms of another kind of
men, I would ask those men to remember that these are among our masters
and we may not ignore them. We might like to treat them with the
contempt they deserve, but we have at present to live under the laws
that they help to make. Doubtless, when we are free, we shall suffer
fools more gladly than we do now, having less to fear from them.




INTRODUCTION


Those who open this book expecting to find in it a romantic sketch,
rather in the style of _Erewhon_, of what the civilisation of the
twentieth century is likely to be after women have won their freedom,
will be doomed to disappointment. It does not deal with what a humorist
in the Cambridge Historical Society used to call that department of
history which treats of the future. Those who look for a plentiful
supply of prophecy will not find it; but they will find a masterly sketch
of the sources and aims of the womens movement; and, in the authors
own words, a brief survey of the directions in which it appears to be
travelling. They will find also wisdom, and knowledge, and understanding.
Mrs. Swanwick avoids cheap and easy generalisation. She writes from a
wide and deep knowledge, which has been gained from years of active
work, especially in the womens suffrage movement as it exists here and
now; and she writes with the temperance and restraint which come of the
philosophic mind.

Her book will be read and digested by her fellow-workers. They are
quite certain to make it their own, for it is an armoury of facts and
arguments bearing on their work. It ought also to be studied by every
intelligent man and woman who perceives that the womens movement is one
of the biggest things that has ever taken place in the history of the
world. Other movements towards freedom have aimed at raising the status
of a comparatively small group or class. But the womens movement aims
at nothing less than raising the status of an entire sexhalf the human
raceto lift it up to the freedom and valour of womanhood. It affects
more people than any former reform movement, for it spreads over the
whole world. It is more deep-seated, for it enters into the home and
modifies the personal character. No greater praise can be given to Mrs.
Swanwicks book than to say that she treats of this great subject in a
manner worthy of it.

Her pages on militancy will be carefully studied. She is known to be
deeply antagonistic to violence in all its forms, and she gives the
reasons for the faith that is in her. It is also well known that she is
a leading member of the National Union of Womens Suffrage Societies,
the chief of the non-militant suffrage organisations. But though she
criticises severely the Womens Social and Political Union, she is not
among those who can see nothing but harm in their activities. Militant
suffragism is essentially revolutionary, and, like other revolutionary
agitations, has arisen from a want of harmony between economic and
educational status and political status. Educationally, socially, and
industrially women have made enormous advances during the last sixty
years. But the laws controlling their political status have stood still.
Similar conditions have invariably led to revolutionary outbursts except
where lawmakers have had the sense to recognise the situation in time and
adjust the political status of the group concerned to the changes which
had already taken place in its general condition. It is by making these
timely changes, and by grafting the bud of new ideas on the stem of old
institutions, that our countrymen have shown their practical political
instinct, and have, on the whole, saved the nation from the ruinous waste
of revolution. They have not yet shown this good sense about women. But
the signs of the times are full of hope that they may revert to type and
be wise in time.

Dr. Arnold, writing from France within a generation of the Terror, said
in reference to the destruction of the feudal power of the nobles over
the French peasantry: The work has been done  and in my opinion the
blessing is enough to compensate the evils of the French Revolution; for
the good endures, while the effects of the massacres and devastation are
fast passing away. If that could be said of the Terror cannot it be even
more positively said of the comparatively innocuous militancy of recent
years? The good endures, while the evil is temporary and passes away, is
as true to-day as it was a hundred years ago.

                                               MILLICENT GARRETT FAWCETT.




CONTENTS


                                                                 PAGE

                                  PREFACE

    _Homo_Human principles of governmentUnscientific scientific
    menOur masters                                               vii

    INTRODUCTION. By Mrs. Fawcett                                  xi

                                CHAPTER I

                     CAUSES OF THE WOMENS MOVEMENT

    Woman becomes articulateWhy the movement has become political
    in EnglandWomens handicapThe need for concentrationTwo
    kinds of change: education, industrialisationAdaptation
    essentialSolidarity of women                                   1

                               CHAPTER II

                      WHAT IS THE WOMENS MOVEMENT?

    Is it chaotic?Knowledge and scopeWhat the world is losingThe
    spirit of the time a scientific one; women must share itAction
    will follow knowledgeIs it to be thwarted action?             14

                               CHAPTER III

                         THE SUBJECTION OF WOMEN

    Importance of motherhoodVocational training of women for
    motherhood a mistakeWhole human beingsFull development
    under Mens domination impossibleSentimentalists and
    BrutalitariansSubjection degradingAre women mentally inferior
    to men?An irrelevant questionOpportunity for development     20

                               CHAPTER IV

                             PHYSICAL FORCE

    Mans undoubted superiorityThe handicap of motherhoodWomans
    battle a spiritual oneDomination by force is bad
    businessForeign policy and warEquality of service and equality
    of sacrificeWar not the only business                         31

                                CHAPTER V

                 DEMOCRACY AND REPRESENTATIVE GOVERNMENT

    Mr. Frederic Harrison and Prof. DiceyDifficulties of governing
    othersCivil rights depend upon political rightsIlliberal
    arguments against womens suffrageSafety a delusionProgress
    due to control of physical force by mindLaw of diminishing
    returns on compulsionOpinions and interests of voter          42

                               CHAPTER VI

                                  VOTES

    Effects of the denial of the voteLegislation,
    administration, taxationStatusThe intolerable slur of
    disfranchisementDirect effect of the voteWhat women wantHow
    Bills are madePeaceful penetrationIndirect effect of
    the voteResponsibility, independence, co-operation            59

                               CHAPTER VII

                THE ECONOMIC PROBLEM: (1) THE WAGE-EARNER

    The domination of economic forceWomans natural
    handicap, motherhoodWomans artificial handicap, law and
    custom_Laissez-faire_ abandonedCase of the pit-brow
    girlsOpening up of trades and professionsA living wageDanger
    of sweated womanhood                                           69

                              CHAPTER VIII

                  THE ECONOMIC PROBLEM: (2) THE MOTHER

    Neglected motherhoodKing Log and King StorkThe
    Englishmans almost absolute power over his wifeSocialistic
    legislationEndowment of motherhoodPayment of wivesMans
    outlook mainly personal, not racialWomans outlook            78

                               CHAPTER IX

                 THE ECONOMIC PROBLEM: (3) THE HOUSEWIFE

    The mother is generally the housewifeConvenient and
    economicalBad conditions of houseworkNo reform
    without discontentMotherhood and housewifery not
    inextricableCo-operative housekeepingDivorce of producer and
    consumerAdvertisement and speculationWaste, adulteration, and
    uglinessSpecialisation needed in the consumer; also collective
    effort and political action                                    89

                                CHAPTER X

                THE ECONOMIC PROBLEM: (4) THE PROSTITUTE

    Prostitution the most commercially profitable of womens
    tradesDefinitionExtentIs it an evil?Is it (1) necessary for
    health, or (2) necessary consequence of evil nature and evil
    institutions?Professions and performancesWhat is wrong with
    men, women, and marriage?A complex evil requiring many
    remediesEducationSelf-respectWagesBrutalityHousing
    AlcoholCrueltyRescue                                         99

                               CHAPTER XI

              THE ECONOMIC PROBLEM: (5) COMMERCIALISED VICE

    Womens crusade against prostitution, alcoholism, and
    warDecay of EmpiresOriginally appetites, have become
    tradesAdvertisement and financeVested interest in
    alcoholTraffic in womenChicago Vice CommissionMore facts
    wantedEnormous profitsTrade controlled by menIgnorance and
    indifferenceTraffic in war                                   117

                               CHAPTER XII

                        THE MANS WOMAN: WOMANLY

    Two idealsMotherly qualities do not attract menWeakness and
    dependence are not motherlyWomen distrust mens judgment of
    womenWomens wilesSocial value of womens qualitiesFlorence
    NightingaleWomen must combine and organiseInarticulate
    women                                                         126

                              CHAPTER XIII

                       THE WOMANS WOMAN: A PERSON

    Ideal, Normal, and Average womanProcrustes bedMotherhood
    not everythingGenius and motherhoodScientific men constantly
    overlook the mindBreeding _versus_ environment               138

                               CHAPTER XIV

                     SEX-ANTAGONISM: (1) MANS PART

    No permanent opposition of sexesMr. Heapes theoryPrimitive
    man and woman are opposedMen and women not the same nor
    equalEffect of luxuryMr. Heapes nightmare: Men brute
    beasts, maidens waste productsLove the reconciling
    forceAdaptation of the Human to environmentWomen not all
    sexThe literature of abuseAre men fit for judicial powers?  156

                               CHAPTER XV

                    SEX-ANTAGONISM: (2) WOMANS PART

    Womens warIs mens need greater?War open and articulateThe
    Ladies GallerySir Charles Grandison on the enemies of
    womenMilitancy and the machineThe mob spiritA revival
    duePress, purse, and partyThe good and the evil of
    militancyIs it War or Martyrdom?Mens hypocrisy about womens
    violenceThe weapon of femininityThe responsibility of the
    GovernmentExasperation is not statesmanship                  173

                               CHAPTER XVI

                        THE OLD ADAM AND THE NEW

    AdaptationA mans world difficult for women to live inMens
    needsThe double standardThe childs needsHealth of
    girlsCo-educationTeaching of sexParasitic daughtersThe
    birth-rateWomen the natural protectors of children; therefore
    they should be given power to protectMen should help womenThe
    experience of FinlandComradeshipFaith                       193




THE FUTURE OF THE WOMENS MOVEMENT




CHAPTER I

CAUSES OF THE WOMENS MOVEMENT

  New occasions teach new duties; time makes ancient good uncouth;
  They must upward still, and onward, who would keep abreast of Truth;
  Lo, before us gleam her camp-fires! we ourselves must pilgrims be,
  Launch our Mayflower, and steer boldly through the desperate winter sea,
  Nor attempt the Futures portal with the Pasts blood-rusted key.

                                                          J. R. LOWELL.


The world is full of books about women,most often alluded to in such
books as Woman. The vast majority of these books have been written by
men, and until quite lately the few women who wrote about women confined
themselves to repeating the precepts laid down by men. There were
remarkable exceptions, of course: Mary Astell and Mary Wollstonecraft,
Emily and Charlotte Bront, George Sand and Elizabeth Barrett Browning
spoke as women and not as echoes of men. Quite recently women have
suddenly broken the long silence, and there is a flood of exposition
which is likely, from its volume and force, to make confusion take the
place of silence. Ellen Key in Sweden, Rosa Mayreder in Austria, Mrs.
Gilman in America and Olive Schreiner in South Africa are a few of the
most distinguished writers; but there are troops of others who, in books
and magazines and papers, strive to deliver their souls. This little
book aims merely at being a brief survey of the womens movement and of
the directions it appears to be taking; a survey which shall deal with
principles and the broad aspect of things rather than with details, and
that will rather suggest what are the difficulties and in what spirit
they should be approached, than offer a universal solution for the
deepest and most complex problem that has been set before the human race.

The womens movement in Great Britain has for the last seven years been
directed so considerably into political channels, the struggle for the
parliamentary vote has absorbed so much of the active, organised and
thinking women of the nation, that one hears people talk sometimes as
if the suffrage movement _were_ the womens movement, and as if, when
the vote shall be won, there will be no more womens movement. One would
have to be very shallow and very insular, too, to think so. And what a
tragedy it would be! What! Shall all these sacrifices be made to get the
vote and then nothing be done with it? Shall the vote be at once the
record of the progress of women and its grave? The womens movement is
world-wide, and whether or no it has taken a political turn depends on
the circumstances of each several nation. That it will be of political
import some day everywhere is unquestionable to us who believe that it
will not die, but that it _is_ life and holds a promise for the race
that was not at our rising. A condition of virtuous anarchy may be the
highest of all ideals; no one, it is to be imagined, regards government,
laws and compulsion as good in themselves; but so long as governments
exist, so long are social reforms at their mercy, and no civilisation
is internally stable until it has moulded the body politic into harmony
with itself. This is not to say that no progress can be made except by
law-making; it is to say that the time comes in the development of every
civilisation when laws and the administration of social affairs must
change to meet the growing needs of the people. It is because British men
have in the main acknowledged this, that the history of Great Britain has
been in the main a peaceful history.

The womens movement is felt in all departments of life. In the education
and training of girls, and, since men are the sons and mates of women,
in the education and training of boys; in social, economic, religious
and political matters. Custom, opinion and prejudice are as important as
legislation; administration of law is sometimes vastly more important
than law-making. On all these lines, then, march the women, but not on
the old beaten paths. Roadmakers they are, and besides the toil of making
the roads, they have not infrequently to endure the harassment of the
stones and dirt which are hurled at them by those who are sitting in the
old track, and who resent their divergence from it.

In England the intensity of the political struggle is due to the fact
that women have made such great advances along the lines of personal and
social effort, while the recognition of them within the Constitution
is still withheld. Moreover, the causes of this continued exclusion
have been of late so merely political, so entirely the result of an
artificial party system, that the women who desire enfranchisement for
no party reasons at all, but from their consciousness of a deep human
need, are exasperated by the pettiness and futility of politicians, who
subordinate a great issue of social right and wrong to the miserable
party game of recrimination and retaliation, of power and office, of ins
and outs. The women who had for forty-six years been steadily building up
a majority in the House of Commons, and had kept a majority unbroken for
twenty-six years (a feat which can be recorded of no other reform party
in parliamentary history), found themselves apparently no nearer the
attainment of their object, for the morally insufficient but politically
overwhelming reason that their majority was composed of men from all
parts of the House.

I do not propose to give the history of the English suffrage movement
during the administration of the last three Parliaments; to be clear
and comprehensible, this would take a considerable volume in itself. I
wish only to point out that these women have been driven to throw their
energies more and more into a political direction because they have
been made to feel that their majority in Parliament would not act until
political pressure was put upon them to compel them to act. I have been
a suffragist all my life, was the plaintive wail of the politician;
what more do you want? Well, the women in the movement want the vote,
and they are realising more and more, with every year that passes and
nothing done, that they must concentrate upon winning the vote. It is
hard enough at any time to get measures through Parliament unless there
is a party advantage to be made out of them. Conceive how much this
difficulty is multiplied when, besides the absence of party support, the
reform is urged by women who have the powers of the purse and the press
to contend with, and who have not one single vote wherewith to get the
vote! Newspapers are owned, edited and written very largely by men and
very largely for men; even what is known as the Womans Page has, till
recently, been contrived in the interests of tradesmen, for purposes
of advertisement. Women are notoriously the poor sex. Even a woman who
figures as a rich woman is often merely an _article de luxe_ for the man
who provides for her, and, though he may hang her neck with jewels, he
does not readily give her a cheque for her suffrage society. All the
more need, then, for concentration, and the fact that these Englishwomen
have, on a very moderate estimate, raised and spent in twelve months
a sum of 100,000 in working for the vote alone, may be taken as some
evidence of the intensity of their demand and of the wantonness of
infliction upon them of further delay and further sacrifice.[1]

I have said that in England women have made great progress on the lines
of personal and social effort. There are reactionaries so consistent as
to deny that there has been any progress at all, and in almost every
direction of change it is possible to find people who think it was bad.
The change in the lives of Englishwomen has been so rapid, however, that
it stares us all in the face and cries out for recognition. Vainly we
wail about the dedicated ways of womanhood, when scarcely a living woman
is to be found there.

Much of the great change has been due to deliberate and devoted effort
on the part of men as well as women, who, at any rate, thought they were
making for progress. The great impulse towards the education of the
people which characterised the nineteenth century made a far greater
revolution in the lives of women than of men. Not only did elementary
education put all the young girls of the working class on something like
an equality with boys, but the foundation of public day schools and
the decisions of Charity Commissioners gave girls of the middle class
a chance of education in school subjects, and, what was of at least as
much importance, removed them from the hothouse air of the home and
the seminary and gave them the discipline of knowing their fellows and
finding their level. The great movement for the higher education of girls
secured, step by step, their instruction in the universities, their
admission to degree examinations and, finally, their admission to degrees
in all but the two most conservative universities. Of more recent growth
is the inevitable development of postgraduate research among women. All
these changes were deliberate and were regarded by those who initiated
them as great reforms. So also were the efforts made, largely by the
same group of people, to open careers to qualified women. All the world
knows of the foundation of the great modern career of sick-nursing; of
the more bitter and prolonged struggle of women to be allowed to study
medicine and surgery and qualify as practitioners therein; of the gradual
introduction of women into State service as clerks, inspectors and
commissioners. All these changes had, to a greater or less degree, to be
fought for by those who desired them. They represented improvements in
the status of women, increase in power, in knowledge and in earnings.
People resisted them with more or less tenacity, and used against the
reformers the sort of arguments they are still using against further
emancipation; but few can be found now who do not admit that, broadly
speaking, they represented improvements. There are, of course, some
Orientalists even in England, who think in their hearts that it was a
great mistake to teach women to read. But most people now accept the
principle that women should have the best education available, and only
differ as to what that education should be.

Other vast changes have, however, been made in the lives of women
which no women or friends of women consciously strove for, which no
one regarded as great reforms, which were, in fact, the unintended and
unforeseen results of mans invention and mans commercial and financial
enterprise, directed solely towards the increase of purchaseable
commodities and the manipulation of these in markets; not by any means
directed towards the improvement of the lives of women and the home,
towards the easing of labour, or the increase of beauty, peace and
health. With the introduction of machinery there came the usual talk
about its lightening the lot of the worker and so forth, but when one
reads the history of the first factories, of child-labour and monstrous
hours of work, inhuman and foul conditions and vast fortunes made in a
few months by exploitation and speculation, one is forced to recognise
that the passing of work out of the home, and of the woman into the
factory was accomplished without thought of social consequences, and
that, of all creatures on earth, the women were the most helpless to
resist this change, had they wished to do so.

These, then, are the two great classes of revolution that have come
over the lives of Englishwomen during the past hundred years. One
blind, unintended, inexorable, whether for good or evil; the other
fought and striven for with the highest idealism and devotion. Both
wrong and disastrous in the eyes of some. Both, whether right or wrong,
accomplishments, hard facts, which the sociologist must meet and either
repeal or amend. The one thing he must not do is idly to bewail the
revolution and refuse either to adapt persons to conditions or conditions
to persons.

Pathetic people lament the disappearance of the woman of a hundred years
ago, and some reproach the present generation with being rude to its
great-grandmother. But surely any great-grandmother of sense would not
wish the twentieth-century man to be mated with a nineteenth-century
woman. Even regarding women merely as complements to men, it is desirable
that the wife should be of the same generation as the husband. And it is
nothing short of cruelty to desire to see an early Victorian lady under
modern conditions; it would be like nothing so much as the liberation of
a cage-bred canary into a flock of ravenous starlings.

The industrial revolution did extraordinary things to women. It drove
them out of the shelter and subordination of the home and bluntly told
them that they must compete for their lives in the open market with men.
It taught them (a lesson which is hard indeed for women to learn, and
which they are only learning very slowly) that only by the combination
of individuals can progress be made in a world where no individuals,
no loves count, and where there are no considerations but economic
considerations. At the same time it gave them wages in hard cash for the
work they had hitherto done as parts of the family organism, without
wages in cash. These wages, for the most part shamefully inadequate for a
human existence, have yet been unconditional and have produced in working
women a sense of independence and a desire for spending money that, for
good or evil, is having an immense effect in the comparison they make
in their hearts between wage-earning and non-wage-earning employments.
Lastly, the use of political pressure by working men, to further their
industrial purposes, has slowly roused working women to desire power to
put that same pressure on for their purposes.

All these effects have been slow in emerging and even slower in becoming
clear; the aroused interest of more fortunate women has greatly helped in
clarifying thought and bringing it to a practical issue. It is sometimes
brought up against the suffrage movement that it is a middle-class
movement, in the sense that women of education and some leisure were its
pioneers. Undoubtedly it was so, in its inception. How could it have
been otherwise? It is so no longer and it never was so, in the sense
that middle-class women wished to secure something for themselves from
which working women should be excluded; the very reverse was and is true,
for, in demanding the franchise for all women on the same terms as men,
privileged women are deliberately asking to be allowed to abandon some of
their privileges. They are asking that the privileges of social influence
which they now possess, and which the charwoman and the factory worker
are without, shall be compensated for, to some extent at least, by the
granting of a democratic franchise to less privileged women.

The entrance of women into money-earning employments has had two further
effects of considerable importance. The Married Womens Property Act
was in part a result; for whereas it was plausible to hold that a woman
had only a courtesy title to wealth which had been made and given or
bequeathed to her by some man, it revolted everyones sense of fairness
that, when a man had said at the altar, With all my worldly goods I thee
endow, he should become entitled to the wages of the charwoman or the
copyright of the novelist whom he had married. Another effect was that
women began more consciously to compare their work with mens work. So
long as men always went out as bread-winners and women stayed in the
home, it was possible to entertain extravagant notions of the arduousness
of a mans toil. Now that women are book-keepers, clerks, doctors and
inspectors, they have a measure that they had not formerly, and to
many women the peace, order, simplicity and convenience of office or
factory may well have appeared in favourable contrast with the exacting
and conflicting claims of the household, run too often with inadequate
supplies, shortage of labour and antiquated tools.

Enough has been said in this very hasty survey to show the gigantic
changes in the lives of women, the necessity for clear and unprejudiced
thinking about those lives, and for a certain courage in experimenting
with them. The women are thinking. What are they thinking about? About
education and training; about marriage and parentage and prostitution;
about custom and opinion and prejudice; about the economic and moral
and religious side of all questions; about organisation and agitation,
about politics and representation in politics; about laws and the
administration of laws.

And the movement is world-wide. I shall speak mainly of the forms it has
taken in England. They vary in every country. But the world is now so
well in touch that the experience of one country becomes the experience
of all, and what women undergo in one country smites the hearts of all
women and rouses in them the sense of personal pride, of womanly dignity,
of faith in womans work and soul. The womens movement has brought about
a solidarity unmatched by any other, a solidarity which represents a very
high ideal of civilisation, a civilisation based upon the law of love and
the knowledge of truth. As the president of the Woman Suffrage Alliance
said at Budapest, women feel now that by the degradation of some women,
all women are cheapened; that what is injurious to the human race is
wrong, whether it be perpetrated in Chicago, in Singapore or in Brussels.




CHAPTER II

WHAT IS THE WOMENS MOVEMENT?

    Ole Uncle S., sez he, I guess
    It is a fact, sez he,
      The surest plan to make a Man
    Is, Think him so, J. B.,
    Ez much ez you or me!

                            J. R. LOWELL.


It is often said that the womens movement is chaotic, that no one knows
whither the modern woman is going, nor even whither she wants to go;
woman is, in fact, adrift, having lost her helm (or perhaps only the
helmsman), and is going, full steam, all round the compass.

It is very much easier to make such assertions, at least they sound
less preposterous, if one keeps to the rhetorical singular and begs
the whole question at issue by assuming that women are one in need,
capacity and character, and that this eternal feminine has been once
for all dissected, understood and catalogued, and that all variations
are merely caprice. But let us drop the singular and we shall see that
although women want as many different things as there are different
women, there are two things which the women in the movement consciously
desire and strive for beyond all others, and these are knowledge and
scope. The womens movement is one to open the doors of the world to
women: that they may know the nature of their own bodies (to every mother
her workshop), and the bodies of men, their mates, not according to the
teaching of the schools and churches, but in the light of modern science;
that they may have in their ranks women who know the condition of law
and medicine and affairs; that the mind and character of women shall be
enabled to play upon these matters with knowledge, and shall present to
the world the complementary view to that given by the mind and character
of men.

In so far as the deepest needs of men and women are one, men suffer as
well as women from the ignorance or degradation of women; a stream cannot
rise higher than its source, and men are the sons of women. In so far as
the bodies and minds, the lives and experiences of men and women differ,
in so far do both men and women suffer, if the specifically feminine
character is unillumined by science, the specifically feminine activity
hampered and checked by external law or economic necessity.

In this striving for knowledge and scope the women are in sympathy with
the spirit of the time. Scientific men have abandoned the invention of
worlds and have betaken themselves to the study of the world presented to
them, in most matters except those in which sex plays a part. Here there
are still some who talk about Ideal Woman, or Normal Woman, of being
unsexed by knowledge and liberty, as if by nature women were unwomanly,
and nothing but the stern restraints of darkness and bondage could keep
them natural. In asking that these restraints should be removed, women
are demanding the only conditions under which any really scientific
generalisations can be made about womans sphere and womans nature.

As lately as the middle of the nineteenth century, Mrs. Norton wrote:

    He has made me dream that it was meant for a higher and
    stronger purpose, that gift which came not from man but from
    God! It was meant to enable me to rouse the hearts of others,
    to examine into all the gross injustice of these laws, to ask
    the nation of gallant gentlemen whose countrywoman I am, for
    once to hear a womans pleading on the subject. Not because
    I deserve more at their hands than other women. Well I know,
    on the contrary, how many hundreds, infinitely better than
    I,more pious, more patient, and less rash under injury,have
    watered their bread with tears! My plea to attention is, that
    in pleading for myself I am able to plead for all these others.
    Not that my sufferings or my deserts are greater than theirs,
    but that I combine, with the fact of having suffered wrong, the
    power to comment on and explain the cause of that wrong, which
    few women are able to do.

Mrs. Norton knew what was the state of the law, having suffered cruelly
from it, and there was, in her day, very little chance of any women
knowing the law, except through just such personal bitter suffering. Few
women, as she truly said, could combine this knowledge with the powers
of exposition, agitation and eloquence which so distinguished her. This
is less true now than it was then. Progressive women are determined that
it shall cease to be true altogether. They are increasingly devoting
themselves to studying the complex social system into which they are born
and are themselves introducing new lives; they are supplementing the
intuitions of motherhood with the reasonings of science; they are finding
in the knowledge of racial poisons justification for what has hitherto
been simple racial instinct. The defilement or the abuse of marriage by
men, which has hitherto been regarded as venial, because the wife and
child were property, acquire quite a different colour when women as well
as men know the effects upon the race. It is possible to tell devoted
ignorant wives that it is their part to endure all and never to refuse.
Medical men have kept silence, priests have preached and lawyers have
advised submission, and ignorant mothers have handed on these precepts
to their daughters. La femme est ne pour souffrir, says one mother of
daughters; and the more woman suffers, the more truly womanly she is.
Entbehren sollst du, quotes the anti-suffragist,to women only,and
sacrifice, _qu_ sacrifice, has been made the womans idol. But when
she gets to know that the sacrifice is depriving her of motherhood or
poisoning the children to come, how then? Will she be so much in love
with sacrifice? Can anyone believe that a woman will retain the old
attitude towards marriage after she has learnt the causes of many of
the congenital diseases of children, or of what are ironically termed
diseases of women? Whatever the view of enlightened women will be (and
I decline altogether to prophesy), of one thing we may be quite certain,
their view will be prodigiously changed by the light.

Women will not only obscurely feel, they will know; when they know, there
is no power on earth that can prevent them from acting. The only question
is whether they shall act freely, or whether their informed energy shall
be thwarted, diverted and suppressed to the point of explosiveness and
to the embitterment of their lives and characters. In Great Britain, at
the present time, this question is acute; but it is being put all the
world over, and different nations are answering it in different ways, and
finding it amazingly difficult to learn from each others experience. Do
we not even find English people prophesying direst results if the causes
for divorce are made equal as between men and women, and these people are
left open-mouthed when informed that in the northern portion of Great
Britain they are so? While others declare that the mere notion of a woman
being a Member of Parliament, of a jury, or of the police force, must be
the cause of inextinguishable laughter, thereby convicting themselves of
bad manners towards two European nations and the United States of America.

The wisest among those who educate the young are disbelieving in the
doctrine of original sin; they no longer regard education as violently
forcing a child into moulds; they believe that in giving scope for
natural energy the teacher is doing almost all that a teacher can
profitably do; they think that as the human race has evolved into two
sexes which are indispensable to one another, the better they understand
one another the closer will be their sympathy and co-operation with each
other, and that, therefore, the segregation of the sexes is bad. The
subjection of one sex to the other is also bad, since the slave-owner
never can really know the slave, while the knowledge the slave has of
her owner is bitter fruit. In the art of medicine, doctors are more and
more setting themselves to remove obstructions to health. Even the penal
codes of the world are slowly becoming less and less retributive. Women,
therefore, are in the direct line of progressive thought when they demand
that their vital force shall not be circumscribed and shackled, but that
men shall give them the same scope as they claim for themselves. And
progressive women declare that liberty will tend to assuage the war of
the sexes, which is as old as the domination of man.




CHAPTER III

THE SUBJECTION OF WOMEN

    Tis such, a tender thoughtfulness! So exquisite a care!
    Not to pile on our fair shoulders what we do not wish to bear!
    But, oh, most generous brother! let us look a little more
    Have we women always wanted what you gave to us before?

                                                CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN.


I have said that the women who are in the movement are craving two
things, knowledge and scope. Many of those who are obstructing the
movement are loud in their professions that they, too, want women to know
moreabout womanly matters; that they, too, desire that women should be
allowed to dowhat they are fit for. And when the inquirer asks what
is womanly, and who is to be the arbiter, the reactionary replies, with
a pitying smile, that it is surely not necessary at this period in the
worlds history to ask what is womanly, and that the inquirer is rather
perverse than honest; that human nature is the same all the world over,
and much more particularly female human nature; that wise men down all
the ages have written books showing that women are instinctive rather
than logical, governed by the emotions, devoted to the individual and
regardless of the whole, incapable of concerted action; and that these
properties of woman, at any rate of normal woman, are specially devised
by Nature for the making of good mothers and for nothing else, and that,
moreover, the burden of motherhood which Nature has imposed upon women is
so great that they have, or should have, no time or capacity for anything
outside the exercise of that function.

I wish to declare at the outset that in my opinion any speculations about
women, any schemes for their education and their life-conditions which do
not take into account the fact that they alone can be the mothers of the
race, are thereby rendered worthless and foolish. We have not to consider
one generation only; even if some philosophers desire to do so, and if
individuals here and there, as they do and always will, achieve it, the
greatest of all impulses will drive to reproduction, and the strongest
of all desires, after those for self-preservation and self-fulfilment
(and frequently even before these), will be the desire of re-living in
the children and re-living better than now. I use the word re-living not
to mean that there is any survival of the conscious personality of the
individual in successive generations, but to suggest the imaginative and
purely altruistic contemplation of future generations which shall reap
where we have sown; this, I believe, is one of the deepest and purest
of those motive forces which lie beyond explanation or justification.
And when I have said this is my opinion, I wish to add that in a large
and varied experience of the so-called feminist movement, in England and
abroad, I have found the importance of motherhood more fully understood
and more religiously proclaimed by the women in the movement than by
any other women. That they are in revolt against much that law and
custom have laid upon motherhood is undoubted; also that they understand
motherhood in a far wider sense than the vulgar one, and that they do not
regard it as a specialised or vocational affair. It has been customary to
divide female humans into women and mothers; this is altogether false.
Women should not be trained to be mothers; to do so at once introduces
all sorts of arbitrary limitations and restrictions and hampers the very
mission it is designed to serve. Women should be trained to be whole
human beings; the measure of a womans motherhood, like the measure of
her love, is the measure of her whole nature. Cramp her nature, limit her
activities, and you cramp and limit her love and her motherhood.

Of course the reactionary replies that we are demanding for women more
than men have. That, if women have this great burden of motherhood, which
men have not, the rest of the load must be lightened in proportion. We
may all heartily agree that the load should be lightened, but who is
to decide upon that portion of it from which women are to be exempt?
Men only? Do we not find that reactionaries describe as a burden and a
care what progressives regard as a tool or a weapon? There are people
now, who, knowing that men have thought the franchise of such supreme
importance that they have rioted and fought and died during centuries of
the worlds history for the right to choose who should be their rulers,
yet assert that to give women an equal share in that choice would be to
impose a fresh burden upon them! In effect these people claim that women
do their work better when it is left to men to decide what that work
shall be and under what conditions it shall be performed; that, although
woman is the guardian of the race, and bears the burden of motherhood, it
is still to be left to man to dictate the terms of motherhood.

To us, on the other hand, it seems that no distinction of race or class
is so fundamental and ineradicable as the distinction of sex. Breeds may
be mixed, a rich man may become poor, or a poor man rich; a man may begin
life as an employed person, and end it as an employer, or _vice versa_;
alone from the cradle to the grave, man is man and woman is woman. When I
insist on this I do not overlook all the interesting and as yet unproven
speculations that are made as to the varying degrees of maleness and
femaleness that there may be in different individuals, nor do I subscribe
to the endless cocksure generalisings upon sexual variation (for until
we can separate acquired from inherited characteristics, we shall never
get very far); I am content to base the essential differences between
men and women upon the known fact that their share in reproduction is
different and produces difference of life, needs and temperament. How is
it possible then, more peculiarly in sex-relations, for men alone wisely
to prescribe to women?

For example. Because willingness to sacrifice is one of the attributes of
motherhood, it is too often assumed that the sacrifice of the woman must
be for the good of the race. Nature gives to each child two parents; man
in his wisdom makes the laws which assign one only, mother or father, as
may be most expedient for him,never both,and when he discusses racial
problems, he is very apt to attribute any shortcomings to the woman, who
has only one task to perform and performs that badly. He forgets that
the child may inherit not only personal qualities but racial poisons
from the father as from the mother, and that the liberty he denies the
woman in sexual relations (giving as his reason the sacredness of the
home and the family) has too often been used by him to the great damage
of the race. He forgets, too, that whereas fatherhood is voluntary,
motherhood by far too often is not. He adds laws to laws, dealing with
factories and workshops, and leaves the mothers factorythe hometo take
its chance in the _sauve-qui-peut_ of industrialism. In Great Britain
he contrives a National Health Insurance Act and leaves out altogether
from its compulsory provisions the health of the mother in the home,
except for maternity benefit. In this same Insurance Act he arranges that
the maidens shall pay for the widows, and the women shall pay for the
unmarried mothers. And when death has removed the one parent whom the
law allows, public provision and private charity alike have seldom any
consolation to offer the widow who has lost her dearest, but to remove
from her motherly care all or some of the children left to her (now
undisputed) ownership. All these cruelties and absurdities are possible
because of the subjection of women.

Reactionaries on the womens question may be divided into sentimental
and brutal reactionaries. The sentimentalists declare (very often in the
same breath) that women are not in subjection, and that they like being
in subjection, that progress lies along the lines of specialisation,
and that women should not interfere with mens work. Women, they
aver, are not inferior to men, but true economy is shown by increased
division of labour: mans to command, womans to obey. There is to be a
specialisation in the virtues, too. Can we ever have, asks Mr. Frederic
Harrison pathetically, too much sympathy, generosity, tenderness and
purity? Can self-devotion, long-suffering and affection ever be a drug in
the market? Can our homes ever be too cheerful, too refined, too sweet
and affectionate? And is it degrading the sex of woman to dedicate her
specially to this task?[2] (To me it seems degrading the sex of man
to suggest that he has no need to practise all these fine qualities,
but that he will practise them vicariously through woman, who is to be
dedicated specially to them.) The sentimentalists suggest that this
willing service women have for centuries rendered to men, and been happy
and good. The bold bad feminists have wantonly stirred up revolt, and
peace and happiness will only return when they have been routed and the
awful rule and right supremacy of man re-established.

I think we may dismiss without much argument the assertion that women are
not in subjection, and indeed, sooner or later, the reactionary always
gets tripped up on this ground. It is not possible to study our social
institutions without coming to the conclusion that they are the result
of the subjection of women and that many of them tend to perpetuate
that subjection. It is inconceivable that women, of their free and
enlightened will, would have chosen this position. That some women are
found to maintain that it is not subjection and they like it, is only a
proof of the mental and moral effects of subjection upon them. There is
a brave spirit which declares that Stone walls do not a prison make,
Nor iron bars a cage, and much of womens work has been done in that
spirit. Exceptional women have triumphed over their prison (at what
cost the life of the Bronts may show), but the world is not composed
of exceptional women, and the mass of women have been degraded by the
narrowness and irresponsibility of their lives. One is familiar with the
idealistic assertion that no one can injure you except you yourself. It
is a fine thing to hold to your sovereign will and force it to command
your life, but who can look round on the world as it is and not see
everywhere signs of how men and women degrade their fellows by cruelty,
carelessness and greed? It sounds like cant to tell the girl and boy who
have been reared in a slum and have never known decency that they need
not have allowed themselves to be degraded. It sounds like cant to tell
a woman she is not in subjection to mens law when this law does not
allow that she is the parent of the child she has borne, and when men can
at any time, and do, deprive her of the inviolability of her own body
and of the right to earn an honest livelihood. No, it is not arguable
whether women nearly all over the world (and certainly in England) are in
subjection, and I do not intend to argue it. The only questions are, How
came they so? Are the causes eternal and irremovable? Would it be well if
they were removed?

I confess to a much higher regard for the honest brutalitarian than for
the sentimentalist; for the man or woman who says candidly that women
are subject to men because they are inferior to men, either physically,
or intellectually, or both. Even among these there is a tendency to
allow, with a shrug, the moral superiority of women, and one is left
wondering whether this admission shows the greater contempt for women or
for morality. But a few thinkers, more robust and far more logical (for
a fine morality is not separable from intellectual force) go the whole
way and assert that women as a whole are morally inferior to men as a
whole. They say women are notoriously less brave and less truthful than
men; their unselfishness is weakness or slavishness, their continence
is due to coldness or compulsion. I propose to deal with the physical
superiority of men in the next chapter. With regard to their mental and
moral superiority, it is an interminable discussion, which is mostly
conducted entirely by the light of ones predispositions, and which leads
nowhere. There does not seem much that can be profitably said about it
except this: that until the incubus of brute force is removed from those
who have a smaller share of it, we shall never know what other force
they may have. Some of the faults attributed to women are manifestly
the faults encouraged by subjection. Mens standards have been applied
to women, and it may be that they do not suit women. As barriers have
been removed, so many of the old confident assertions about women have
evaporated that the scientific mind will suspend judgment for a while.
It is quite true that in music, painting, sculpture, poetry, no woman
has ever yet attained to the highest that men have attained. It may be
that womens lack of genius in the arts is due to some inferiority of
mind, or it may be due to an essential incapacity for or an artificial
prohibition of the passionate, concentrated egoism, which alone can
produce the greatest works of imagination. The special pleader against
women will declare that if they had any capacity at all, it would have
shown itself in music and painting, for young ladies have always been
encouraged to sing and to play and to sketch. And as for poetry, it is
only necessary to have pencil and paper andgenius. As if the kind of
parlour tricks that used to be expected of marriageable young ladies had
any relation at all to creative art! The eighteenth century or early
Victorian parent had a short way with any daughter who wished to take any
art seriously. We know how Maria Edgworth humbly submitted to have her
work blue-pencilled by her affectionate but inferior father, how Harriet
Martineau suffered from the endless task of shirt-making, how Jane Austen
hid her compositions under fancy work, lest visitors should suspect she
was that unsexed thing, an artist.

But the whole discussion whether women are mentally inferior to men is
indeed impertinent to the practical issue whether or no women should
have their lives and work controlled by men. Only by liberty of action
and scope for our powers can we develop healthily and harmoniously, and
the fact that so much of a womans life and experience lies altogether
outside what a man can experience should surely make men a little
diffident about dictating conditions. The opportunity to develop is not
a reward of virtue nor a prize for genius. Women, as well as men, should
have the fullest possible opportunities for development, not because
they are equal to men (a most unfortunate phrase), but because it is
good business, socially speaking, to develop all your human as well as
your material resources. The developed person will be more useful, more
companionable, more reasonable, more happy and more amusing than the
undeveloped. And if man be really the intellectual superior of woman, why
should he fear her competition?




CHAPTER IV

PHYSICAL FORCE

    He will not read her good,
    Or wise, but with the passion Self obscures;
    Through that old devil of the thousand lures,
    Through that dense hood:

    Through terror, through distrust;
    The greed to touch, to view, to have, to live:
    Through all that makes of him a sensitive
    Abhorring dust.

                                      GEORGE MEREDITH.


In the last chapter the question was put whether women are intellectually
and morally inferior to men, and the conclusion was that this was a
question incapable of solution, certainly now, and probably always;
furthermore, that, even if it were answered in the affirmative, this
would be no reason for denying to women opportunities for their fullest
development. We now come to another sort of superiority, which is
capable of proof, which has been proved to demonstration and which of
itself accounts perfectly for the subjection of women during the ages of
human development in the past. This is, of course, the superiority of
men as a whole, over women as a whole, in size, weight and muscle. It
seems doubtful whether, among races where women have the same physical
discipline as men, they are any less enduring of fatigue, and there are
some hardships, such as shortage of food, broken nights and severe pain,
which women seem better adapted to bear than men. Again, of men and women
engaged in the same employment, such as the teaching professionin which
no one can say that women have the lighter task, for which women are
much less highly paid, and which very rarely represents the whole of the
work the woman teacher is expected to get through in the daythe women
live longer than the men. The superiority of the male over the female in
size, weight and muscle seems the only one established beyond doubt, and
as this superiority is seen in most of the animals, there is a strong
presumption that it is not entirely due to artificial conditions of
feeding, exercise and so forth. The extraordinary increase in the average
size of British girls during the last hundred or even fifty years shows,
however, that semi-starvation, lack of exercise and of the nervous energy
which comes from hope and a purpose in life, were the purely artificial
causes of the extreme weakness of the weaker sex during the eighteenth
and early nineteenth centuries. The experiments that have been made in
the reaction-time and relative sensibility of boys and girls, suffer
from the circumstance that the subjects experimented upon could not be
scientifically treated, and all that the experiments prove is that boys,
often fed and always reared differently from girls, showed slightly
quicker reaction-time, and, in a few cases, slightly more developed
sensibility. Anyone who has begun to realise the extremely complex causes
of good and bad nutrition and its close dependence on mental states will
put himself the question whether the confined, thwarted, and monotonous
lives of girls have not counted for very much in the imperfect nutrition
of their nerves and therefore in their lack of initiative and response.

But now, of this undoubted muscular superiority of men. What has it led
to? In early stages of civilisation, Might was Right. A man took what
he could and kept it if he could. Nations and governments were founded
on the same principle of self-protection and self-aggrandisement, and
empires followed. Women did not escape this law of the strongest. In
addition to what seems a congenital muscular inferiority, women had the
enormous handicap (for fighting purposes) of motherhood. The nine months
of gestation and the succeeding period of nourishing and cherishing the
infant were, and are, and always will be sufficient reason why women
cannot successfully resist men by force. Not infrequently have I heard
women, and much more frequently men, say on public platforms that it is
not true that women cannot fight; that some women are stronger than some
men, and that women are only prevented by men from enrolling in the army
and defending their country. This always seems to me the silliest stuff.
How could men prevent women from fighting if women wanted to fight and
were as strong as men? If women were as strong as men and as fond of
using their strength in fight, and if they desired their enfranchisement,
how is it that they have not fought for it and won it long ago? But the
womens battle is a far harder one: it is to induce men to give up the
primary impulses of animal nature at the command of reason and knowledge;
to refrain from taking what they _can_ take, from commanding where they
can enforce obedience. And this is a battle which was begun ages ago, and
in every age has had its victories,victories due, not to the pitting of
physical force against physical force, but, first, to mans deep need
of woman, which prevented him from destroying her, as he destroyed all
other weaker creatures when he had no use for them, and, second, to the
mutual love of man and woman and their common bond in the child. Physical
force is a great and vastly important part of the forces wielded by man,
but it never has been the only one, and it is increasingly being brought
under the dominion and guidance of other forces. Women, too, have their
physical force, without which the race would be extinguished; and, in the
last resort, if we could imagine the brutality of man contemplating a war
_  outrance_ against women, their strength would be found to lie, not in
the fact that they could conquer men in a physical conflict, but that
they could die. For those who can only read what is explicit, I hasten
to add that I do not believe such a state of things could ever arise,
although, in a state of war, men show themselves by no means incapable of
exterminating the enemys women.

If we find some of the womens champions a little hazy on this matter,
their confusion is as nothing, however, to the muddle-headedness of
some of the reactionaries. I have heard one and the same champion of
anti-suffragism (calling himself a Churchman, too) speak of the dominance
of physical force as a regrettable fact, do lip-service to the gospel
of Jesus, and add that he feared the world was not ready for it yet and
probably never would be, and follow this up by the much more fervent and
heartfelt declaration that it was only just and right that men, who
alone can enforce the law, should make the law. Now, if it is right and
just that physical force should rule, undirected by moral force, it is
not a regrettable fact, and we need not seek to alter it. But this is
not what anyone really means. Everyone admits that laws should be based
upon justice and equity, and that they have no stability if this moral
sanction is entirely lacking. Anti-suffragists say that suffragists deny
the dominance, sometimes even the very existence of physical force. This
is not so. We think, on the contrary, that it is too dominant and that
man is sufficiently reasonable to see this, when, as is now happening all
over the world, women show that they are not consenting parties to such
domination. Mr. Norman Angell has pointed out that the modern pacifist
does not deny that nations can wage wars; what he says is that war, at
the present time, and between civilised countries, is bad business. I
do not deny that most men could knock most women down; I say it would
be bad business to use this power, and I believe that most civilised
men would agree that it would be bad business, that they have no desire
to rule women in this way, and that society will be much healthier and
happier when men as a whole abandon the practice altogether. And the
anti-suffragists who make such statements about men have so low an
opinion of them that I am ashamed for them.

Another frequent absurdity of anti-suffrage argument is the assertion
that we wish to destroy physical force, and that if we succeed, we shall
become the easy prey of other less foolish nations. Now, to wish that
physical force shall be controlled by knowledge, intelligence and right
is not to desire its destruction; on the contrary. There is no enemy of
health and vigour so subtle and so strong as ignorance and incontinence.
It is not love and kindness, temperance, soberness and chastity which sap
a nations strength and make its young men to fail when tested; it is
ignorance, or disregard of natures laws, the sweating and overcrowding
of millions, the slackness and self-indulgence of those whom their more
fortunate conditions should have made leaders of men. It is to the
interest of men that women should do their work well, and under the
dominion of physical force, of fear and compulsion, women can never do
their best work.

Women are making great claims: they are not only claiming that the men
of their own land shall not govern them by physical force alone, but
they are making what, to some quite honest people, seems an outrageous
claim,that they should have a right to an equal share with men in
deciding foreign policy and the question of war. They claim this right,
because they believe that it would be for the good of the State, and
because they think the State owes it to them because they are citizens
and not parasites; because they are doing an absolutely indispensable
work and making sacrifices which are at least equal to the sacrifices men
make for the safety, honour and welfare of the State. Let us examine into
the grounds of this plea.

At an open-air meeting a man approached the speaker with what he
evidently regarded as a poser: If you get a mans rights, will you
women fulfil a mans responsibilities? It was a good question to ask
at an open-air meeting, where close reasoning is almost impossible,
and the answer, No, brought a sneering, Ah, I _thought_ not! and a
round of applause from the youths round the cart, who didnt look as if
they had thought much about even a lads responsibilities. The heckler
was, of course, begging the question. By talking of a mans rights
he did not merely mean the rights which a man can now by law exercise;
he implied that a man held these rights by virtue of certain services
rendered by him, and that, if women claimed these same rights, they must
be prepared to render these same services. I will deal in a subsequent
chapter with the question whether, as a matter of fact, voting rights
are, in modern England, dependent upon the military service or upon the
physical force of the men who exercise them. For the moment I wish to
discuss the ethical and social consequences of asserting that only one
kind of service entitles a person to liberty, and that service being the
taking of life, women, whose service consists in the giving of life,
are not entitled to liberty. A mans responsibilities! Let us take
them at their very hardest. Let us contemplate the ideal world of the
anti-suffragist, where man goes out daily to his toil in the cruel world

            commits his body
    To painful labour, both by sea and land,
    To watch the night in storms, the day in cold,

while woman lies warm at home, secure and safe. He, if fighting is to
be done, fights for home and country; she has no more arduous part than
to weep, while he is away, and welcome home the victor. But stay! This
version of affairs always assumes that the man is the victor. Have not
the vanquished wives, too? Study the picture of any war, even the most
modern and the most civilised. Are the women of the vanquished, the
invaded country, secure and safe? From the tale of the Trojan women
to the latest reports of Bulgarian or Servian atrocities, we find all
truthful records give the lie to this rosy picture. Men who go to war
have the honour and the glory, the bands and the banners, the stars and
medals and monuments and maybe the glorious death. Women die, and see
their babies die, but theirs is no glory; nothing but horror and shame
unspeakable, the slaying of those for whom they willingly risked their
lives, when they brought them into the world, the destruction of all
that is most precious to them. When men go to war, who remain behind to
administer affairs, to be father and mother in one? When the men are
killed, are their responsibilities killed with them? When the flower
of manhood is destroyed, who are worthy to be the mates of the women and
beget the men of the future?

  The children are tying the sheaves, the women winnow the ear,
  The children are plucking the grapes, the women yoking the steer,
  Doing mens tasks, and thinking mens thoughts, with no time for a tear.

These are only some few of the questions that surge up in a womans
mind when men talk as if war concerned men only. But after all, in a
modern civilised state, is war the only thing that counts? Is soldiering
the only national service? Mr. Kiplings grandiloquent phrase about
womans hindering hand on the warriors bridle rein makes men and women
who are mentally alive smile at its ludicrous inappropriateness to the
greater part of life as we live it. And if we admit that, fighting being
a mans business, the details of how best to fight are properly left
to men to determine, can we refuse to admit that, child-bearing and
rearing being a womans business, the details of how to bear and rear
children are properly left to women to determine? And if the amount of
freedom persons possess depends on the amount of service they render
to the State (a principle which, as I have shown in Chapter II., I do
not admit), how can anyone say that the service of killing the enemy in
offensive or defensive war is a greater service than the provision of the
human material for killing or being killed by the enemy? Suffering and
sacrifice are immeasurable things, and it would be a bold man who would
assert that the sufferings and sacrifices of men in warfare were, in
modern states, equal to those of women in the giving and nurture of life.
Indeed, this discussion, like so many others raised by people finding
reasons for clinging to the past, is about as futile as the discussion
which of two millstones grinds most corn. Yet one parting recommendation
I would like to offer, before leaving this particular aspect. It is to
advise the reactionaries that they would be on safer ground if they
shifted mans claim to superiority from his military to his economic
qualifications. For we can conceive, and an increasing number of people
are contemplating with eager hope, a world in the far-off future that
will not contain one soldier; but no one anticipates that this world will
ever arrive at a state in which there will be no mothers.

In conclusion, I wish to disclaim altogether the kind of assumption
that one frequently finds implicit in much of the feminist talk of the
present daythe assumption that men have been the barbarians who loved
physical force, and that women alone were civilised and civilising.
There are no signs of this in literature or history. If men have enjoyed
fighting, and gloried in bloodshed, as many still do, that is because
their blood was hot within them, and the women of their age and race
loved them for it. The experiences of men and women have each made for
civilisation, and women have not the mans obvious temptation with
fists to try conclusions, since they are for the most part foregone
conclusions. If motherhood has been for much in the education of the
race, so have science and the love of the arts and beauty. Agriculture,
manufacture, commerce, even finance have engaged mens hearts, and
more often than not turned them from war. War is waste and the womens
movement may be taken as the type of all the great conflicts there have
been between coercion and development, bullying and understanding, love
and hate. What has been good in war has been the life-forces, the energy,
the joy that men have put into it. They are finding other conflicts than
those with their fellow-men, into which they can put these forces, and
the womens movement, in part the cause, is also in great measure the
effect of the disappearance of barbarism.




CHAPTER V

DEMOCRACY AND REPRESENTATIVE GOVERNMENT

    Did you, too, O friend, suppose Democracy was only for
    elections, for politics, or for a party name? I say Democracy
    is only of use there that it may pass on and come to its flower
    and fruits in manners, in the highest forms of interaction
    between men and their beliefsin Religion, Literature, Colleges
    and SchoolsDemocracy in all public and private life.WALT
    WHITMAN, _Democratic Vistas_.


Reference has been made to the half-heartedness of the school of
physical force. While asserting loudly that physical force rules and
always will rule the world, these people become very indignant if they
are accused of immorality, or even of unmorality. Few have the moral
courage to declare themselves unmoral, and the physical force apologists
for the domination of man over woman always proceed to argue that this
domination is not merely a regrettable fact, but is all for the best.
They argue that men as well as women possess a moral nature (which is
undeniable), and that they will direct their physical force in accordance
with their moral nature, which is, in public affairs, superior to that
of women. I have already touched upon the lack of foundation for this
assertion of superiority. There is too little ascertained fact and
far too much speculation and assertion on this point. Mr. Frederic
Harrison (whose connection with Positivism has done little to modify his
profoundly unscientific temperament) has published some essays on the
womens movement, in which he picks out certain ugly characteristics
common to humanity and attributes them to women only. He professes
such a respect for women, such admiration for their moral, spiritual
and even intellectual qualities, that one really wonders how it comes
that he thinks it necessary to scold them so much. He sees them acting
in politics with that spite and untruthfulness which is too often the
failing of some good women, showing a rancour, an injustice towards
persons, a bitterness of temper, which cause them to fling away common
sense, fairness, truth and even decency. Dear, dear! How bad these good
women are, and who would have supposed that this passage was written by
a philosopher who holds that women are, as a sex, morally superior to
men? One would have supposed that to have accused good women of lying,
spite, folly, injustice, rancour and indecency was not to leave much
over to hurl at the bad ones. But he proceeds to say that it is womans
very possession of higher qualities which makes her political judgments
untrustworthy and unstable. One seems to have heard something very
like this in the course of the Dreyfus case, when it became a reproach
to be intellectual. But if these are the characteristics of women,
according to Mr. Harrison, we may smile to see how he gives himself
away, unintentionally, when he comes to those of men. He has just been
alluding to the fair, impartial temper with which men habitually weigh
all sides of a question, and declaring that all political questions
and all parliamentary elections really turn, or ought to turn, on nicely
balanced judgments; yet when he comes to anticipate what would be the
effect of womens enfranchisement upon the judicial mind, the fair
impartial temper of men, he declares that it would weaken mens respect
for womens opinion and even their respect for women: _The womens
vote would always be actually or possibly on the wrong side._ (Italics
mine.) The conversation of the wolf with the lamb in La Fontaines fable
is an admirable expression of this state of mind, but to call it fair
and impartial throws a queer light on Mr. Harrisons own particular
quality of male mind. He alludes pathetically to the sufferings men have
endured at the hands of women when men have felt it their duty to oppose
something women desired. It is a pity when rancour and spite manifest
themselves, but have women never suffered at the hands of men? How about
the witch trials? Did men make the path of Joan of Arc, of Josephine
Butler, of Doctor Jex-Blake, even of Florence Nightingale a path of
roses? Are not suffragists even now having all sorts of preposterous
views and disastrous vices attributed to them? And is there one of us
that has not been pelted with mud and refuse from the hands of a man
(save the mark)? One murmurs Marconi, one glances at the Balkans, and
wonders if women could really improve on the language that has been used
by men of each other in political controversy.

We have had enough of this irrelevant talk about the inferiority of
women. Do we replace it by equally foolish assertions of the inferiority
of men? Not a bit of it. We base the womens demand for a share in
government on precisely the same grounds as those on which men have based
their demands. The difficulties we all find in acting for others are,
broadly speaking, of two kinds. There is the difficulty of understanding
the lives of others as completely as we understand our own, and there
is the fact that our own affairs have a motive force which the affairs
of others have not. Only people desperately driven to excuse themselves
could pretend that men, any more than women, are unaffected by these
difficulties, and Professor Dicey, whose unsentimental mind revolts from
cant, has frankly admitted as much. Under a representative government,
he writes,[3] any considerable body of persons who are not represented
in Parliament is exposed, at best, to neglect. In a country such as
England the views of the unrepresented are overlooked far less through
selfishness than through the stupidity or preoccupation of the voters
and their representatives. Nor can any impartial critic maintain that,
even at the present day, the desires of women, about matters in which
they are vitally concerned, obtain from Parliament all the attention they
deserve. Despotism is none the less trying because it may be dictated by
philanthropy, and the benevolence of workmen which protects women from
overwork is not quite above suspicion when it coincides with the desire
of artisans to protect themselves from female competition. No suffragist
could put the argument better than this candid anti-suffragist.

How is it possible for a man to assert that he knows what a woman feels
and wants as well as she herself? He would have to be more than man!
Even women, who spend their lives in studying men, do not make the
claim that they can feel a mans passions as he can; and, in another
mood, the man who claims to be the arbiter of a womans life will rail
at her incomprehensible and fickle nature. But women have tongues and
know only too well how to use them! We may consult with women and be
advised by them, say the reactionaries. Yes. And also you may not,
is the reply. Professor Dicey makes much of the distinction between
civil, as distinct from political, rights. He speaks of reconciling
his enthusiasm for everything which promotes the personal freedom and
education of women with the strenuous denial to them of any share in
sovereign power. But the male electorate is not all so enlightened as
Professor Dicey, and civil rights depend upon political rights. Men
less intelligent, less sympathetic than Professor Dicey are absorbed in
their own affairs, and women have had to fight and are still having to
fight for every miserable concession in personal freedom and education
(and in such fights Professor Dicey has often been on the womens side),
and they have no security that they will be allowed to hold what they
have won. Successive Local Government Acts have shown plainly how men
will almost unconsciously sweep away the rights of women when their
minds are concentrated on some reform for which men care. The Married
Womens Property and the Custody of Children Acts repealed cruel and
unjust disabilities which had been imposed by men upon women. Are we to
suppose that all injustices are of the past, and that from henceforth for
evermore men will feel like women?

Besides the difference in relative values which men and women place upon
things, and the vast gulf that there is between actually experiencing
and only listening to an experience, there is the fact that even when
people know what is right, they do not always do it without some external
pressure, whether of public opinion, legal rights or political power. In
truth, the reactionaries are too thin-skinned when they wail about the
sex-antagonism of women who frankly declare this weakness in men. If we
asserted it of men only they would have some right to complain. But we
do not. The very existence of customs and laws and governments proves
that men believe humanity needs these motives in addition to moral ones,
and, unless you are an anarchist, you must agree that they do. When
men get altogether away from women they forget women. It is natural.
Therefore women, who suffer from being forgotten when their lives are at
stake, require that men shall not in future be able to get altogether
away from them when they are employed in governing them, as they do
now in Parliament. Mr. Harrison gives us an interesting and touching
little bit of information when he says, To speak the truth, I only know
one woman whom I would always trust to come to a right decision; but
this fact has really no general interest or value, and even if women
did not, on the whole, represent the views of Mr. Harrison, this would
not prevent them from representing their own, which is what matters in
representative government. Mr. Harrison becomes appealing when he says,
Now I say frankly that I do not trust the average woman to decide these
complex issues; because that is just how _we_ feel! _We_ do not trust
the average man to decide these complex issues. A fellow feeling makes us
wondrous kind, and perhaps when Mr. Harrison has grasped this feeling of
ours, he will see that the proper thing is for neither man nor woman to
attempt to decide these complex issues alone.

We have only to consider the very different lives women lead, leaving out
of account the debatable differences in nature, to see how impossible
it is for a man to look on life with a womans eyes. To begin with, as
long as he insists on being absolute master, there is the unbridgeable
gulf between those who command and those who obey, and the tendency of
this division of labour (as the reactionaries humorously call it) to
result in making men conceive it is theirs to think and act and womans
to feel. Men must work and women must weep is perhaps the most fatuous
expression in all literature of this attitude. Men are rich and women
are poor. Men are employers and women are employed. Wage-earning men
think mainly of wages, women are more concerned with prices. Men enjoy
fighting for its own sake, women only suffer from fighting. Mens part
in parentage involves only the satisfaction of passion and appetite;
womens part may involve these, but it also involves much suffering and
long care. It follows from the apportionment of mens and womens work
and interests that in the main men will be more concerned for property
and women more concerned for the person, and our laws and administration
amply bear this out. It follows also that men will spend money upon the
things they care most about, and starve the things they care less about.
We see millions lavished on war and destruction, on monuments of stone
and iron, on pomp and circumstance: we see health wasted, human creatures
neglected, education slighted. The titles and the honours go to those who
make money and take life. Things are in the saddle, says Emerson, and
ride mankind.

Those who defend the male franchise declare confidently that in England
the family is the unit, and that the voter casts his vote after a
balanced judgment of the interests of the family as a whole. This is,
of course, entirely without foundation. The vote is _not_ given to the
family when the head of the family happens to be a woman; the vote is
_not_ refused to a man when he has no family; several votes are given to
one man, although legally he cannot have several families. So that, even
if, for the sake of argument, we allow that husband and wife are one, and
that one is the husband, we still have a very large number of votes which
represent men only, and those men bachelors. The evils of this in such a
country as England are patent; in such a country as South Africa they are
greater still. There the bachelor vote is unstable and indifferent to the
permanent interests of the people, for the adventurous bachelor comes for
what he can find, to make money, not a home; to take his pleasure where
he can find it, among the women of an alien race, and leave in his track
the degradation of sexual ethics, the embitterment of racial hatred, the
burden of a fatherless race of half-breeds. All these ills fall upon the
voteless women of South Africa, and are felt in their rebound by the
English women at home.

The possession, by the people, of the parliamentary vote does not make
a democracy. Many other things are necessary for that. But the vote
is a piece of the machinery of democracy without which it cannot work,
and it is lamentable to hear men who call themselves Liberals, and who
use all the old catchwords of the democratic party, refusing to apply
their Liberalism to women and bringing against the enfranchisement of
women all the ragged old arguments which used to be brought against
mens enfranchisement and which are ragged from the shot wherewith the
old reformers riddled them. Men know better than women what is good
for women! Yes, and the slave-owner knew what was good for his slaves;
and the employer knew what was good for his employees; and the landlord
knew what was good for his tenants! But the slave and the employee and
the tenant did not think so then, and no one dares say so now. The
womens day is coming too, and the people of the future will deride
those Liberals of the early twentieth century who talked of the Will of
the People and forgot the mothers; who boasted of their intention to
enfranchise every person of full age and competent understanding and
left out half the people; who declared that citizenship should be the
basis of voting rights and denied these rights to all women, thereby
admitting (what the women had been rebuked for asserting) that Britons,
when they happened to be female Britons, _were_ slaves. No external
defeats could have so sapped the prestige of the political Liberal party
as the fact that it failed altogether, as a party, to recognise the
force and the progressive idealism of the womens movement. There is
now in England no movement that can compare in vigour, intelligence and
devotion with the womens movement. When the Liberal party acknowledges
this and identifies itself with the movement, it will once more step into
the line of progress; until then it is true to say that the progressive
women and the Labour party which supports them are the only democrats.
Moreover, the penalty of supporting reaction in one direction is that
the logic of events drives men into the logic of thought. Many a Liberal
who hoped he could restrict his illiberalism to women, is finding
himself forced into general principles of reaction which will sooner or
laterhorrible to contemplate!overwhelm men too.

On the other hand, the effect upon women of the agitation for the vote
has been enlarging beyond even the most sanguine expectations. I myself
have seen women of the middle class, who began by desiring the vote from
a personal and quite legitimate sense of their own worth and claims,
led, from a sense of justice, to entertain the claims of other less
fortunate women, and by degrees find their desire redoubled on behalf of
these women, whose needs, experience and sympathy gradually demonstrated
as far exceeding their own. No less remarkable is the enlargement of
the lives of these less fortunate women, by the growth of sympathy and
understanding between the different classes and by the linking up of
public and private duties and aims. Since shes been a suffragist, I
have heard a man say, my wife has seemed to take more interest in the
home. It hasnt taken her thoughts off; it has only made her think more.
And I have heard a middle-aged woman use the pathetic phrase, Since I
began to think, meaning, Since I joined the suffrage movement.

Is it all unmixed good, then? Is the womens movement singular in this,
that it is perfect? Will women make no mistakes? By no means. Who could
be so foolish as to think so? But by mistakes we learn. If you wish to
learn a new language you must blunder in it first. One of the reasons of
womens slow development is that men are so afraid women will make fools
of themselves. We all have a divine right to make fools of ourselves,
because the force that created us decreed that only so could we learn,
and the convention by which a woman is never allowed to be a fool all to
herself, as an individual, but is made to sin for her whole sex, is an
anti-progressive convention which must go. A woman fires a building and
we are told Woman has disgraced herself, She is unfit for the vote.
But men sack empires and burn cities to the ground and no one says Man
has disgraced himself, He is unfit for the vote.

I think I hear the horror-stricken Anti declare, A right to make a fool
of yourself? But it is _our_ Empire that you are asking for,to play
with! Our Empire which we made ourselves and which is so complex, so
delicate, so nicely poised, that one push from a foolish womans little
finger will send it reeling to destruction. The Anti wants to make
our flesh creep; but it refuses. We dont for a moment admit that the
Empire, with its millions of men and women, belongs to men any more than
it belongs to women. We cant believe, either, that the Empire is in so
shockingly delicate a condition as the Antis make out. The cry is for
safety. Only Death is safe.

    Permanence hangs by the grave;
    Sits by the grave green-grassed,
    On the roll of the heaved grave-mound.

Life is never safe, yet the happy warrior prefers life. The Empire was
certainly not made by people who chattered of safety and permanence, nor
will it be kept by such people.

The direction in which reactionaries anticipate most trouble is one where
I believe it would be last to show itself. It is in foreign affairs, in
the relations with other countries, in the issues of peace and war that
they see most danger, if women shared responsibility with men. I do not
believe it, because for one thing these matters are exceedingly remote
from the electorate, and in the vague way in which popular sentiment
makes itself felt it is highly improbable that womens sentiment would
on any particular issue differ from mens. It is difficult to conceive
of Englishwomen loving Germans while Englishmen were burning to cut
their throats. What is possible is that women may gradually help men
to see what very bad business war is, simply because it is obviously
and always such bad business for women, and while undoubtedly some men
trade in war, no women do. The idea is freely expressed that men would
resent women having power to control the forces of the army and navy,
when women cannot themselves serve in the army and navy. It does not seem
clear why they should, for they do not seem to resent women helping to
control the police force, although women do not serve in the police. In
this latter case the matter comes much more closely home to everyday life
and yet we have no trouble. Sometimes the difficulty is put in another
way. We in England, it is asserted, may be willing that women should
share in the control of their own lives, but if we allow this, we shall
lose the respect of more virile countries. But the feminisation of
politics (to use their phrase) will not give the country one man less,
nor will it make one man weaker or less virile. If really the respect
of other countries depends upon the amount of our physical force, that
force will still be there, undiminished, and in course of time, as we
fervently believe, through better and humaner conditions, will be greatly
increased. We do not find the Scandinavian races nor our Australian
cousins to be particularly womanish, yet Norway and Australia have given
all their women the vote.

My theme hitherto has been that the domination of physical force has
been the cause of the subjection of women, and that it is contrary to
progress and civilisation that physical force should dominate moral
and intellectual force. But, of course, physical force has never been
entirely dominant, otherwise the mind of man never would have emerged
from the mind of the beast. All progress is due to the growth of mind
controlling physical forces, and the anti-suffragists who assert that
the vote has been and is merely the counter which represents the
physical force of the voters, and that no one would dream of obeying a
law if he once suspected that it were not made by those who possessed
the preponderance of physical force, are making an assertion which not
only reflects quite undeservedly on the intelligence of men, but which
is patently contrary to facts. Things may be bad; they might be much
better; but physical force, in this crude sense, never has entirely
ruled the world since prehistoric times. The idea at the back of the
anti-suffragist contention is, as far as one can make it out, that you
cannot compel a man to do a thing _against his will_, if he feels that
he has the strength to resist. We must admit that. But there are many
ways of moving the will besides the crude way of physical force; there
are various kinds of compulsion and various forms of resistance. The
Antis at one moment declare the intellectual superiority of men over
women, and the next moment involve themselves in a line of argument which
presupposes mans entire deafness to reason. Man is, however, gradually
discovering that he may get more out of his fellow-man (and _  fortiori_
out of his fellow-woman) by agreement than by compulsion, and the
resistance offered by out-and-out striking is only an extreme case of
the moral law of diminishing returns upon increased compulsion. It has
been found that slave-labour is the least productive labour; it is slowly
getting to be believed that overwork means under-production. The degree
of physical force used by men against women has not been sufficient at
any period to destroy women, but it has crippled them; it has resulted in
not getting the best out of them. Though stupid men and blackguards have
not understood this, the better sort always have, and the great mass of
men have never even dreamed of applying their force to its utmost against
women. It is quite true that Government rests on physical force in the
sense that Governments dispose of physical force; but those who form
the Government are not chosen for their personal possession of physical
force, nor even with any thought that they represent the physical force
of the community. In a country with representative institutions the
Government is supposed to represent the _opinions_ and _interests_ (not
the physical force) of the majority of the electors. Before the modern
extensions of the franchise, the country was actually ruled by the votes
of men who were few relatively to the whole population, and, therefore,
by no means represented the physical force of the community, and before
the days of parliamentary government a small oligarchy or even an
autocracy ruled. Democratic government has, in fact, come to birth and
steadily grown with the steady decline of the rule of physical force.
And it will be seen that this must be so, when once we have grasped the
fact that the unmoral use of physical force may here and there profit an
individual but is always bad business for the community.

If we abandon the visions of the Antis, we shall see that, as a matter
of prosaic fact, the vote in England is given to a man not as a reward
of virtue (as the assertion, woman has disgraced herself, would seem
to imply), nor as a prize for intellectual ability (as those who speak
slightingly of womens intellect would suggest), nor as the guerdon of
physical prowess (as the physical force party declare), nor does it
depend upon his being a husband and father. An Englishman who has, by
debauchery, ruined body, mind and spirit, and who has neither wife nor
child, may yet have the necessary qualifications to vote, for these are
a confused and illogical jumble of accretions, but, such as they are,
they depend on the possession of property. It is proposed by Liberals to
abolish these and to enfranchise a man in virtue of his manhood. Once you
see the immorality, the waste and the stupidity of the physical force
argument, there is no possible ground for refusing to enfranchise a woman
in virtue of her womanhood.




CHAPTER VI

VOTES

    Who made the law thet hurts, John,
      _Heads I win,ditto tails_?
    J. B. was on his shirts, John,
      Onless my memory fails.
        Ole Uncle S., sez he, I guess
        (Im good at thet), sez he,
        Thet sauce for goose aint _jest_ the juice
        For ganders with J. B.,
        No more than you or me.

                                             J. R. LOWELL.


We come now to the question, what is the use of the vote, about which
women are making such a bobbery? Not more bobbery, be it well understood,
than men have made; not nearly as much, if we are to take as a measure
the amount of suffering that men have been willing to inflict and the
crimes they were willing to perpetrate in pursuit of the franchise.

We exaggerate the _use_ of the vote, say the Antis. Well, even if it is
possible to exaggerate the use of the vote, it is scarcely possible to
exaggerate the significance of the continued denial of the vote. To the
awakened, organised, articulate women who are demanding the vote, the
shifts and excuses and dodges of politicians, the exhibitions of mob
spirit and the revelations of passions and motives usually hidden have
been startling. Women, whose private lives were fortunate, have been
taught that they were living in a fools paradise concerning the lives
of other women. The sight of woman-baiting by a mob of her political
masters; the listening to debates in the House of Commons; above all, the
arguments used by anti-suffragists have made women infinitely keener and
more conscious of their position than they were before. Many of these
things have been as startling as a blow in the face. The letter of Sir
Almroth Wright, the verses published by Mr. Rudyard Kipling under the
title, _The Female of the Species_, the animus of Mr. Belfort Bax and
the vulgarities and shallows of Mr. Harold Owen and the _Anti-Suffrage
Review_ must have converted thousands of men and women who before had
refused to believe that such views were at the back of the opposition to
womens enfranchisement.

But do we exaggerate the value of the vote? People often talk as if the
vote were only of use for making more and more laws, and ascribe to
women the desire to make men good by Act of Parliament. They forget
that votes may also be of use to resist and to modify legislation; that,
through Parliament, attention is called to the administration of public
affairs; that Bills are capable of amendment, if the electors will be
keen and united enough for their amendment; above all, that Parliament
raises money by taxation of women as well as of men, and that Parliament
alone decides how this money shall be spent. Three million women and
nine million men profit by the Insurance Act. Is this not sufficient
commentary on the assertion that a womans chief business is to mind the
baby and that men protect her in that business? The only medical care
that she gets from the Insurance Act (barring maternity benefit) is when
she refuses to mind the baby or has no baby to mind.

There are two ways in which the possession of the vote will benefit
women: first, by raising their status, and, second, by giving them
power to influence Parliament directly through their representatives.
The matter of status seems to me by far the more important of the two,
but because it is intangible, people with no imagination cannot grasp
it. Yet men from the days of ancient Greece and Rome to now have very
passionately clung to the badge of citizenship. We find magistrates
now in England adjusting their sentences so as to avoid adding the
humiliation of disfranchisement to other penalties of the law; we find
Parliament debating earnestly how relief may be given to poor men without
involving them in pauperisation, which means the loss of the vote; we
remember how Members of Parliament pleaded for the coloured man in South
Africa that the intolerable slur of disfranchisement should not be
cast upon him, and we note with burning indignation that these Members
are quite placidly content that this intolerable slur should remain upon
their own mothers and wives. It is only an idea. Yet ideas have moved
the world, and this idea that women are not born to be the slaves of men
has rankled for ages; now that it has found expression, it rankles no
longer, it has become an inspiration to millions of lives, not only of
women but of men too.

As to the direct use of the vote in affecting legislation, it is quite
ludicrous to find people denying it. Like any other tool, the vote
is only of use if the owners use it, and that men have made bad or
insufficient use of the vote only shows that men may do so; it does
not show that men always will do so, nor does it show that women ever
will. Now there is one idea that always seems to crop up in the minds
of politicians when any womens problem is presented to them: it is, to
prohibit. As Miss Gore-Booth has remarked, politicians of the type of Mr.
John Burns cry out periodically, Go and see what the women are doing
and tell them not to! It is always done, ostensibly, in the interests
of the mothers and their children, but women know that what the mothers
want is the means and freedom to do their work, not prohibition. What is
the matter with the poor is their poverty, says Mr. Shaw. What is the
matter with the mothers is their poverty and the ignorance that comes
out of poverty. Remove the poverty and the ignorance and you will have
done vastly more to check the infant death-rate and the manufacture of
unemployables than you will by prohibiting all the mothers in the land
from earning (not from working! No one ever proposes really to relieve
them from toil!) and putting them absolutely into the power of men.

The influence of the womens vote would be felt by no means only at
election times. In the countries where it exists it has not so much
affected the balance of parties; that is to say, it has not had just that
element of fighting that so interests the sensation lover and that is
so fundamentally contrary to real progress. There has been no apparent
opposition of interests and no sex-war, but politics have been peacefully
penetrated by the womens point of view. Women without the vote can do
something to form public opinion; but women with the vote will find
public opinion far easier to move. Acts of Parliament do not spring
full-grown from the minds of politicians; we see how different interests
are at work moulding them, before they are even presented as Bills,
and it is the voters who are listened to, the voters whom the Minister
in charge addresses and persuades and treats with, the voters whose
amendments are first taken. I do not deny that politicians do sometimes
consult women, but what women? Some say they consult their own wives;
who selected these wives, and for what qualities? It is farcical, when
democracy insists that men shall choose their own rulers, to tell women
that they get the equivalent when men choose what and how many women they
will consult. Voting women may be expected to influence Bills both in
their introduction and in their passage through Parliament. Members have
repeatedly stated that they could have voted for certain amendments or
measures if they had felt that they owed their seat in Parliament in part
to the votes of women who favoured these measures. A member represents
only his constituents, and in the long-run he votes in accordance with
the views of his constituents. If he does not, it is their fault for
electing him.

There are, moreover, the indirect effects of the possession of the
vote. The politician who is also a statesman should know that Acts of
Parliament only work well with the intelligent co-operation of the
people. Who can expect the women to co-operate intelligently in working
Acts about which they were never consulted, and which no one ever takes
the trouble to explain to them? Men say they were never consulted about
the Insurance Act. But it was their own fault if they allowed themselves
to be overridden. The women could not help themselves. In addition to
the certainty of better co-operation, there is the increased sense of
responsibility, the stimulus to thought and organisation, the fact
that politicians and reformers all concentrate on educating the voter
or the potential voter. We all know the candidate who will only answer
questions from electors, and any woman who has not been permitted to ask
her own question, but has been compelled to put men up to ask it, knows
with what pathetic ease such men are fobbed off. Men are not educated
in womens questions as they should be, and the women themselves are
not educated and independent. In his fine speech in the House on 6th
May 1913, Mr. Ramsay Macdonald said: I share the opinion of those who
say that the mere granting of the votes to women would not directly
increase wages, and so on. But the difficulty we have got is that when
we try to increase womens wages there is a sort of subordinate frame of
mind in which women approach all these points. They are careless. They
will not organise. They will not take pains and trouble to look after
themselves. What is the reason? The reason is that they have always been
accustomed to shuffle responsibility for their own actions upon somebody
elses shoulders. The very argument which the Prime Minister used this
afternoon, that we were doing so well for women, was the most humiliating
argument that any Liberal could use against such a reform as we are
asking for. We want women to do these things for themselves, because they
can do them a great deal better than men can do them. We want to get them
into the frame of mind of independent and self-respecting citizens who
will co-operate with us, and not merely ask us to do things for them,
when they can do them much better for themselves. What would happen if
the franchise were given would be this: Women would take a far keener
interest in such questions as wages, a far keener interest in their place
in the factory or workshop. Women as enfranchised citizens would join the
unions, would make their economic demands with far more advantage, with
far more spirit, with a much more rigid backbone than they do now. Up
would go wages as an indirect consequence of the vote having been given
to them. So we come back to status after all as the most important of
all the effects of enfranchisement. I hope to return later on to this
matter of low status, and show how it has been responsible for other
evils than political evils.

Many opponents of womens suffrage are really anti-suffragists in a
far wider sense than they will admit; the arguments which many of
them use are arguments against the franchise altogether. But if the
anti-suffragist happens to be a candidate for Parliament, he dare not
speak his mind about the existing male electors, lest they should not
return, to represent them, a man who expresses so frank a contempt
for them; he does not, therefore, express it. But some of the women
anti-suffragists do, and we may learn a good deal from them as to
the hidden sentiments of the men like-minded with them. One of the
fallacies into which they most frequently drop is the confusion between
legislating and electing legislators. They become eloquent about the
disaster that would follow if women voters decided matters of foreign
policy and high finance, and some cheap fun is made at the notion of
the charwoman negotiating a loan, and the society beauty delimiting a
frontier. But the male voters do not perform these functions, and the
women voters would not be called upon to do so. The strongest argument
against the Referendum is that the great mass of the people cannot and
never will be fit to judge of matters requiring specialisation, nor to
conduct negotiations requiring secrecy and despatch. Popular election
means that the people chooses its rulers, chooses thosewhom it should
then trustwho shall carry out in detail the policy whose broad lines
the people approve. Free press, free speech, open debates are the
safeguards and opportunities for criticism and revision, but not for
legislation and administration, which are the functions of governments
and not of electors. There is no system conceivable that will work if the
people will not work it. Men, unfortunately, are to be found who expend
their ingenuity in discovering how best they can make representative
institutions unworkable, and these men are by no means on one side of the
House only. A great deal of the preposterous machinery of Parliament has
been set up to circumvent the wreckers, who are, in practice, whatever
they may call themselves, anti-democratic. But no machinery can take the
place of common sense. It is the belief of the progressives that women
have at least as much common sense as men, and that they have proved
themselves far better diplomatists, perhaps because they have never had
the same temptations as men to rely upon physical force as an argument.

The conclusion is, that to be without representation in a country
professedly governed by representative institutions, is to be perilously
near to a state of slavery. If women were given the vote, England would
be a better place, not because women are better than men, but because
conduct is not right or wrong independently of its effects, and the
effects of slavery are bad both for slave and for owner.




CHAPTER VII

THE ECONOMIC PROBLEM

(1) THE WAGE-EARNER

    And here Ill fling the pillow, there the bolster,
    This way the coverlet, another way the sheets:
    Ay, and amid this hurly, I intend,
    That all is done in reverent care of her;
    And, in conclusion, she shall watch all night;
    And, if she chance to nod, Ill rail and brawl,
    And with the clamour keep her still awake.
    This is a way to kill a wife with kindness.

                                        _The Taming of the Shrew_, IV. i.


The day of the rule of mans physical force over women is over in what
are called the civilised countriesa relative term! There are, of course,
very many unacknowledged relics of it, but they are disappearing, partly
through the growth of reason, partly through the insistent hammering
of the women and their men champions. But there is another source of
dominance of man over woman, more insidious, more penetrating, much more
difficult to abolish: this is the dominance of man by economic force.

It is difficult to believe in the intellectual honesty of those feminists
who declare that women must fight men on an equality in the economic
world. I have read articles insisting that women must not only bear
the child, but make provision for the child, unaided by men, either
individually or collectively. Such proposals depend on the evolution
of a race of Superwomen unlike any the world has seen, and no one has
demonstrated, or even suggested, how such a race is to be formed. The
women who dream these dreams are very attractive visionaries, but I do
not propose to follow them into their Utopia, for the reason that I am
more interested in the world of reality. In this world of reality, we
must face the fact that women, for every child they bear in health and
strength, are made less capable of producing exchange value (called
wealth), and that not only motherhood, but potential motherhood, affects
and always will affect the market value of a womans work. The people
who do not admit this are exceedingly few; but those who do admit it are
sharply divided in their views as to how the resultant evils are to be
met, and even those who believe most earnestly in the womens movement,
differ in their solutions of the economic problem. Yet the economic
slavery of women is worse and more difficult to deal with than any other
slavery, and it cannot be met by machinery only; it must be met by a
change of heart, a change as needful in women themselves as in men. Women
must have pride and belief in themselves and their work, and men must
leave off applying to women a cash standard wholly inappropriate to that
part of the community whose work is so largely work for the future.

I have preferred to begin with this statement of the womens economic
handicap, because I find the great and ineluctable weight of it more
often under-rated by women in the movement than by those I have called
reactionaries. The queer thing is, that the reactionaries who make such
play with the burden of woman, are those who propose to pile on to the
necessary burden of the child the totally unnecessary additional burdens
of ignorance and lack of training, and a thousand restrictions of law and
custom, while still making no serious attempt to remove all necessity
for earning. Analogies are often misleading, but, in modern England, the
picture is fairly correct which shows woman with a baby at her breast,
one hand tied behind her by trade and legal restrictions, her eyes closed
with the bandage of ignorance, her mouth gagged by the refusal of voting
rights, hampered by the skirt of custom, having to struggle over the same
rock-encumbered ground as man, unburdened, with head erect and limbs free.

Women are notoriously paid less than men, and the reactionaries are very
fond of giving us a somewhat superfluous lesson in elementary economics,
to account for these lower wages. They say that wages depend on the
demand for, and supply of, labour, and that these depend on the amount
of skill required, the pleasantness and healthiness of the work, the
amount and the cost of training for it, and so forth. They say that
womens work is less efficient than mens, partly on account of their
essential inferiority (one instance of this being their greater liability
to sickness), and partly because of their expectation of matrimony, which
makes their work less constant and makes their parents less willing
to expend money in training them. Finally, they say that women have
other sources of income than their labour, and that their wages being
supplemented from these sources, they are able and willing to take lower
wages than men, able and willing in many cases to accept wages upon which
one woman cannot live. These sources are twofold: their male relations
partly keep them, so that their wage is only a pocket-money wage; or
other men partly keep them, in return for their favours.

With the exception of the somewhat sweeping assertions about the
essential inferiority of womens work, I am prepared to admit all these
statements as being manifestly in accordance with facts as they are. This
does not increase my enthusiasm for facts as they are; on the contrary,
it makes me cast about for means of changing them, and some of them seem
to be already in course of rapid change. As for the greater incidence
of sickness among women making their work less valuable, it would be
interesting to inquire how much of that sickness is due to the low
standard of living, caused by low wages: by overwork from having to do
housework and needlework when the days wage-work is done, by poor food,
lack of rational pleasures, and the depression of knowing that, however
hard they work, there is no future before them; a woman cannot rise.
There is another cause of depression, in the nature of the dependents
a woman generally has. A mans dependents mostly include a wife, who
nurses and looks after him, and children, in whom he can have hope and
pride. A womans dependents are the crippled husband, the old mother,
the invalid sister for whom there is no hope. When a woman falls sick,
there is frequently no one to give her the little comforts and help
which may prevent the sickness from becoming serious. It is more than
doubtful whether womens greater liability to sickness is not simply the
result of conditions too hard and depressing for the health of anyone,
man or woman. Perhaps men would break down far sooner than women, under
the strain of a life as joyless as that which most women are expected to
endure.

Of the essential inferiority of womens work, I will only say that,
except in the matter of muscular power, it is entirely unproven. Many
employers prefer women, saying they are quieter, cleaner, more sober,
more trustworthy, than men; others disagree. The willingness of parents
to allow time and money for the training of their girls is being
considerably modified, and it is in the power of public opinion to
modify it much further. The liability of women to marry and pass out of
wage-earning is a drawback which will always exist to some extent, but
which would be greatly reduced by better organisation. The existence of
a class of pocket-money workers has been very much exaggerated, and there
is no reason why women should not, by judicious combination, practically
eliminate this peculiarly obnoxious type of blackleg. The supplementing
of wages by prostitution is a more difficult problem, to which I will
return in a later chapter.

Are there no other causes for womens low wages? Let us see. Demand and
Supply regulate wages, they say. Then anything that tends to restrict the
field of labour wherein a group of persons may compete, lowers the wages
of that group of persons. So long as by law women cannot be lawyers,
chartered accountants, or clergymen of the Church of England; so long as,
by administrative action, women are excluded from all the well-paid posts
in the Civil Service, and married women tied out from teaching and the
post office; so long as, by custom and the action of mens trade unions,
women are either directly refused admission into trades or indirectly
refused by being denied apprenticeship; so long as all these artificial
restrictions of womens labour exist, will the supply of womens labour
in other directions be artificially increased and their wages lowered.

So at the present day it is by no means true to say that wages are
determined by Supply and Demand acting without restriction; Supply and
Demand are artificially affected by all sorts of forces, not least of
these being political forces, which have established fair wages clauses
for men in Government employ, and are establishing trade-boards for many
of the sweated industries in which women were the victims. We abandoned
the principle of _laissez-faire_ some half a century ago, and most of us
have no desire to return to it, for under a system of absolutely free
industrial competition, women must go under. But what we do desire is
that protection shall be given to women in ways that will help them and
not in ways that hinder them, and that wage-earning employments shall
not be taken away from them without any equivalent. Experience has shown
that men alone cannot be trusted to judge of womens employment fairly.
A gentleman is shocked to see a woman with her face covered with coal
dust; but it is healthier to have coal dust on your face than cotton
or lead dust in your lungs. They do not like to see a woman tip a coal
waggon with a twist of her loins; they do not watch the overdone mother
of a family carrying water up and down steep stairs on the eve of her
confinement or a week or two after it. Three times has Parliament been
invited to put a stop to the employment of women at the pit-brow, all
for their good, of course. And the reason given is that it is bad for
their health. The country was scoured to find a doctor or a nurse who
would give evidence of cases of strain or injury, but all they found
was evidence that consumptive girls from the cotton mills became robust
and healthy at the pit-brow. The climax of absurdity was reached when
gentlemen of the House of Commons pleaded that the women ought to be
protected from hearing the bad language of the colliers. As if these same
colliers spoke, in the home, quite a different, and only a parliamentary,
language! And as if, when you come to think of it, a mans right to swear
were a more precious thing than a womans right to work! The fact is
that, in this instance, as in many others, the work was to be taken away
from the women because some men wanted it, and they were not ashamed to
use their political power to try to filch the work from the women, though
they were ashamed to own up to the reason. Their intention was thwarted,
because there were men in Parliament and out who refused to be convinced
by the pretension that the restriction was for the womens good, and
because the women made a tremendous fuss, came up to London, held
meetings of protest, and roused the country and the press. But this was
the third battle over this one position; and why should women be called
upon to defend their right to earn their livelihood in honest, necessary
labour? If women were to demand legislation to prohibit men from
following the unmanly and unhealthy occupation of selling sarsanet
over a counter, or writing accounts in a book, and taking the bread out
of the mouths of the women, there would be more to be said for it than
there has been for many restrictions men have made on womens work.

What the women in the movement want is the opening up of trades and
professions to women. We should then find what women could do, and it
would be unnecessary to prohibit them from doing what they could not
do. If, further, a living wage were insisted on, those who did the work
best, whether men or women, would be employed, and those who were not
worth a living wage to any employer would drop out of employment and be
dealt with by the State. It is bad business for man to treat woman as a
competitor in the labour market, whom he will grind down and grind out
altogether if he can. A sweated and degraded womanhood is as great a
danger to the community as a sweated and degraded manhood.




CHAPTER VIII

THE ECONOMIC PROBLEM

(2) THE MOTHER

    In the dark womb where I began
    My mothers life made me a man;
    Through all the months of human birth
    Her beauty fed my common earth;
    I cannot see, nor breathe, nor stir,
    But through the death of some of her.

                                    JOHN MASEFIELD.


The neglected motherhood of England cried out for attention, and it is
getting attention with a vengeance. A veritable Babel is being raised on
the subject of mothers. Progressive women are all for more recognition
and support of motherhood, but the difference between the reactionaries
and them is that they hold the first thing necessary, to give intelligent
support and recognition, is the liberation of the mother from all the
antiquated rubbish of coverture law and from some of the worst results
of economic servitude. Else indeed may women find that they have only
exchanged King Log for King Stork. While King Log is reigning, little is
done for the mothers directly by the State. Women, when they marry, are
merged into their husbands, who hold them as property, and have towards
them certain legal responsibilities, of a nature somewhat analogous to
those they have towards other living and sentient pieces of property, The
State has always dimly known that in the quality of its citizens lay its
true and lasting wealth; but penal laws, which used actually to mutilate
men and women, and which still tend to reduce their vitality and to drive
them to imbecility and madness, are plain witnesses of how imperfectly
this truth has been grasped. Improvements in these respects are, however,
on the way. This is said to be the age of the child, and through the
child it is becoming also the age of the mother.

In England, at the present day, a working man has almost absolute power
over his wife. That he uses this power in the main as humanely as he
does, is a proof of how much better men are than the laws which they
make or tolerate, and of how much real affection there is between men
and women. The fact remains that, especially among working people, where
the woman can have no money of her own unless she is in a position to
earn it, the husband has the most awful powers of inflicting torture and
wretchedness upon his whole family, and that it is distinctly safer for a
working woman not to be married to the man she lives with. That working
women so greatly prefer being married, again shows how strong in them is
idealism and the love of social order. What may an Englishman do with his
wife? His physical force is supported by law as regards his marital
rights. He can insist on his wifes faithfulness to him, while using
complete licence himself. He is supposed to maintain her in accordance
with his station in life, but if he fails, it is very difficult for her
to find redress. She can pledge his credit if he has any, but it may
be refused, and she can then only get maintenance from him by leaving
him and taking the children with her and throwing herself on the rates.
The Parish will then take action, not for the sake of the woman or her
children, but to save the rates! That is to say, she must become a pauper
before she can get what he is supposed by law to give her. Even when the
law has given her a maintenance order, the recovery of the money is made
vastly difficult and precarious, and if the husband absconds, it is no
ones business to find him, unless, again, the woman becomes a pauper.

What would men say of a law which only allowed them to recover their
debts on the same terms?

The husband can prevent his wife from earning, and he can claim any money
she saves out of the housekeeping. He can bring up the children as he
pleases, and control them even after his death, by will. He can leave
the whole of his property as he pleases, even if it has been accumulated
by the joint-work of his wife and himself, and if by doing so he leaves
her and her children destitute. If he is wilfully idle and refuses to
maintain her, she can have the law of him, and send him to prison:
much good that does her! The latitude allowed by the law in the matter of
personal chastisement of the wife has been a byword ever since _Truth_
published its weekly list. I have read this list on and off for over
twenty years and I see no change. One week is very like another. Flogging
a wife till she is covered with bruises, driving her out of the house on
a winters night in her nightgown, kicking her when she is with child,
and other assaults too abominable to mention have been held insufficient
to entitle the wife to a separation. I repeat, it is _safer_ for the
woman to need no separation because she has never tied the knot.

By far the greater number of men do not by any means do what the law
allows them, but are kind, toiling and fond husbands and fathers. But
even when the father is the best of fellows, it happens in millions of
cases that he is not able, under modern conditions, to make adequate
provision for his family, and no working men can make adequate provision
for the widows and young children they may leave. The State began to
make serious provision when it introduced free elementary education. The
next step was free meals for the needy, and this was rapidly followed by
free medical inspection and treatment of children in schools. All these
developments are undoubtedly socialistic, and involve the principle
of giving, not according to deserts, but according to needs. And the
interesting situation arises thatalthough we go on saying that the man
supports his family, and must, therefore, have a much larger wage than
the womanwhen the State pays for education, food, doctoring, nursing,
it does so from the rates, which are paid by women as well as by men.
No rate-collector troubles whether his rate is levied on a woman or a
man; nor does he inquire whether the woman is supporting a family or no.
Our experience of socialistic legislation so far goes to show that male
politicians are disposed to say to women, Whats yours is mine; whats
mines my own. The Insurance Act is perhaps the most flagrant example
of this, for by its provisions the States weekly twopence goes to nine
million men and three million women; it is paid for out of the pockets
of the taxpayers, and so is the whole of the cost of administering the
Act. Practically all women feel the weight of taxation, yet here the men
profit three times as much as the women, and by an extraordinary irony,
the women who are selected to be left out of sickness benefit are the
very women who are doing the admittedly womanly work of making a home,
and nearly all women are left out of unemployment benefit.

It is easy to see how these anomalies arise. It is not by any means
easy to provide a remedy for them. One scheme, propounded by Mr. H.
G. Wells, and with a few ardent supporters, is the State endowment of
motherhood. If this were adopted, the individual man would be relieved
of the necessity of providing for his child, and the individual woman
would be relieved of her economic dependence on her husband. There
has been markedly little support for this proposal as yet among women
in England, although Ellen Key in Sweden is a warm advocate, seeing
in it the opportunity of women to do their life-work well. So far as
the scheme applies to women who have lost their husbands, there is a
considerable measure of approval; it has sometimes been described as
boarding out children with their mothers, and is, to a very limited
and inadequate extent, actually practised by some Poor Law authorities.
A small beginning, too, has been made in the maternity benefit, and now
that it has been made payable to the mother, it may be considered a true
experiment in the direction of endowment.

In the abstract there is a great deal to be said for the notion that,
since children are not properly held to be the property of their
parents, and since the welfare of the children is the highest interest
and the gravest concern of the State, it is the State as a whole that
should shoulder the responsibility of the children, and they should
not be at the mercy of the vicissitudes of one single life. The women
should have the responsibility of bearing and rearing the children,
and the men should have the responsibility of providing maintenance
for the children and their guardians; but the men should pool their
responsibilities, and, out of taxation levied upon all men, the children
and child-bearing women should be supported. In this way it is claimed
that the personal relations of men and women would be relieved of the
economic incubus: the husband would be the womans mate, but would
cease to be necessarily her employer. If she chose to keep his house,
that would be a piece of voluntary service, to be paid for by him like
other voluntary service; for cooking and cleaning and blacking grates
is not a part of motherhood. Under such a system, each sex would really
make the contribution characteristic of that sex, and the question of a
family wage would be solved. A man would be able equitably to claim
a higher wage than a woman for the same work, on the ground that, as a
man, he was taxed as women were not, for his share of supporting the
human family, and the widows and spinsters would cease to be burdened out
of their smaller wages with rates and taxes to pay for the unfulfilled
duties of men. The proposal has, in fact, so many theoretical advantages
that it is curious so few women can be found to look at it favourably.
The reactionary would naturally not do so, because all changes are
abhorrent to her. The progressive women are, some of them, oppressed by
the dreary details in which Mr. Wells has revelled, and by the awful
prospects of standardisation and inspection, and red tape. Utopias are
always so appalling to all but their creators, and when I read Mr. Wells
enthusiastic description of how his endowed mothers will live, my soul is
filled with an unutterable sense of lamentation and mourning and woe.
Is this, I ask myself, an instinct which it would be folly to suppress?
Or is it merely that the idea is too new for me, progressive though I
like to think myself? I dont know.

I cannot agree that there would be anything derogatory to womanhood in
the maintenance by men of women whose motherhood prevented them from
maintaining themselves. The actuarial standard, of which we heard so much
during the debates on the Insurance Bill, is totally inapplicable to
mothers. They have a claim on the State and should be proud to make it.
Too often, the poor woman trembles to confess that she is with child, and
is tempted or even compelled to destroy it unborn. This is an abomination
and a most grievous injury to both women and men. But the supporters of
the scheme have not yet given a consistent reply to those who ask what is
to be done for the mother when the children are grown up. Is she to be
pensioned? It is not enough to say that she can return to wage-earning,
for this is generally not true. By marriage she is often compelled to
leave the place of her employment, and every year taken from wage-earning
makes it more difficult to return to it.

This is a much greater practical difficulty than the fear of
over-population which some people raise. People are always in a panic
about the birth-rate; it is always too high for some and too low for
others. They suggest that if the endowment of motherhood were instituted,
and a man altogether relieved of the individual duty of maintaining
his offspring, there would be no limit to that offspring. It is quite
possible that a free womanhood would in itself provide the natural and
right limit. Those who talk as if women would deliberately have as many
children as possible, so as to go on earning motherhood grants, overlook
the fact that at present the women who have the largest families are
those who are the least able to support them, and suffer most from
having too many. It is a well-established fact that increased comfort
and refinement decrease fertility, at the same time that they decrease
infant mortality. Furthermore, it might be hoped that the endowment of
motherhood might make it possible for many men who now remain single and
are a great danger to the community, to marry.

It is not my task, and it would be an impossible one, to say whether
the women of the future will develop the family along individualist or
socialist lines. That they will not be content with things as they are
is one certainty. Another is that they ought to be made free to reform
conditions in full consultation and agreement with men. Lady Aberconway
has suggested that men should be obliged by law to give their wives a
fixed proportion of their incomes, and there appear to be in England more
followers of this idea than of the endowment of motherhood. It should
certainly be possible for a wife to sue for maintenance, without being
compelled to go on the rates, but the fixed payment of wives has very
many and very great practical difficulties, and it would not help the
millions of cases where the mans total earnings are inadequate. Many
men, even now, give not a proportion, but practically the whole of their
wages to the wife to administer. A fixed proportion of one wage may be
enough, and the same proportion of another too little, and a small family
may easily be brought up on what would be penury for a large one.

What is urgently needed is, that the problem should be dealt with by
men and women not in the spirit of bargaining, or endeavouring each to
best the other, but with a single endeavour to do right by one another
and by the child. Nature has so arranged matters that the women cannot
evade a considerable portion of the burden of parentage. Men can,
and not infrequently do, evade the whole of the burden of parentage.
Together all good men and women should so contrive their body politic
that every child shall have the care and nurture it requires. Hitherto
mans outlook as regards marriage has been personal rather than racial.
When the inequality of the marriage law with regard to infidelity is
objected to, he has, for ages past, explained that he has made infidelity
a more serious fault in a woman than in a man, because the result of it
in a woman might be that her husband would have to support another mans
child. This is so, of course, but it is generally a far less serious
injury to the race than the results of a mans infidelity are. It seems
to be a law of nature that some of the present must always be sacrificed
for the future. The woman may have to sacrifice liberty, genius, life
itself. Neither can the man with impunity evade his sacrifice. And he may
not regard it as a gift or a favour to the woman, for which she must, in
return, be subservient. It is his toll to the future, the future of his
world as well as hers.




CHAPTER IX

THE ECONOMIC PROBLEM

(3) THE HOUSEWIFE

    O the soap vat is a common thing!
        The pickle-tub is low!
    The loom and wheel have lost their grace
    In falling from the dwelling-place
        To mills where all may go!
    The bread-tray needeth not your love;
        The wash-tub wide doth roam;
    Even the oven free may rove;
    But bow ye down to the Holy Stove,
        The Altar of the Home!

                                  C. P. GILMAN.


In the great majority of households the wife and mother is also the
housewife. In the great majority of households this arrangement is the
most economical and suitable in every sense. So long as families live
each in a separate home there will be a vast amount of domestic work
to be done in the home, and a great deal of this work being suited to
womens strength and capacities, it seems more appropriate, as well as
more economical, that each woman should do the domestic work of her
own home, and do it to her liking among her own children and her own
possessions, rather than go out and do another womans work for wages.
Further, a woman who is attending to the needs of young children is
perforce a great deal in the home with the children, and therefore it
is again economical that whatever work she does, in addition to caring
for the children, should be work that can be done in the intervals, and
that does not require her to waste time and strength in leaving the
home. A large part of the function of child nurture is merely to be
there, on guard and for emergencies. The child is both better and happier
that is not too much interfered with; that lies kicking and crowing on
a mattress, making acquaintance with its toes, and as it grows older,
finds its own games and delights, in copying the arts and crafts of its
elders. In sickness the whole of the guardians attention may be taken,
but in health it is a fact that a woman can best develop the child by
being herself occupied, so long, be it well understood, as the occupation
does not take the whole of her attention. Babies must be talked to and
sympathised with, and as they grow older the busy guardian must not be
so busy that she cannot play their plays with them. The sort of work
which occupies the hands and only a portion of the head is obviously the
sort of work which is appropriate to the child-minder. A floor can be
scrubbed, a grate blacked, bread made, and clothes mended with a baby on
a mattress in the room, and a couple of tinies playing shop in a corner.
It is not an easy life, and the mother may often feel she doesnt
know which way to turn; but if children were not too many and houses
were more convenient, and all housekeeping tools more adequate, and the
housekeeping money sufficient, the life of the mother who is also the
housewife would be a happy and healthy life; she could hope to do her
work really well, and most women would prefer it to any other.

What are the causes of the present discontents among housewives? Many
indeed. They feel that the woman who is not only bearing and rearing
the children, but also buying and cooking and washing and cleaning and
mending for the whole family, should have some of that independence which
comes from handling the money she has earned and saved. I remember a man
at a street-corner meeting once heckling me with the question whether a
woman had not all that she required if she had love an her keep. He
was a candid fellow, and when I asked him whether love an his keep
would satisfy _him_, and whether he did not like to have some of the
money he had earned as spending money, to do what he pleased with, go
to a football match,or even make his wife a present,he laughed and
said, Well it takes a woman to think of such things! Of course I do,I
never looked at it in that light before. The mother while she is bearing
children should be kept in health and strength; the woman who is making
wealth by personal services just as much as any other worker, should be
paid for her services. If this is not done, if a woman only gets her
keep as any other domestic animal does, it is likely that, in modern
times, she will be tempted to go out to work, when it would be better
for all concerned that she should stay at home and work. Very often, of
course, she is not merely tempted, but forced to go. The result is that
we see women with the treble burden of child-bearing, wage-earning out of
the home, and housework within the home. Small wonder when each of these
is ill-done. The marvel is how well done they often are.

Sometimes, again, by the conditions under which the men choose to work,
a monstrous burden is piled upon the housewife. The men who have been
most persistent and most successful in obtaining an eight-hour day for
themselves, have been those who have laid the heaviest burden upon the
women. In the cottage of a miner you will sometimes find men working on
each of the three shifts, and one housewife to do for them all. This
means four sets of meals (where there are young children as well), and
three sets of hot baths, and that condition of things which a good
housewife detests more than any other, of never being tidied up. A
canvasser reports how she found a housewife of this class looking so
worn out over her ironing that the visitor remarked on it, and the
patient housewife replied, You see, Ive not been rightly to bed for a
fortnight. It is these men, too, some of them, who were so outraged
at the suggested indignity of compulsory baths at the pithead. The
freeborn Briton reserves to himself the right to bring his coal dust
home to the scrubbed boards and washed pillows of his domestic drudge,
and when he secures his eight-hour day, does not dream of employing some
other woman to help his wife with her extra shifts, so that she, as well
as he, may go rightly to bed.

Those who are intimate with the lives of poor people know how desperately
hard on the women are the quick-coming children and the dreadful
inadequacy of the money she gets for housekeeping. The increase in
drugging as a preventive is a matter for very serious consideration. It
is not only hard work and under-feeding that makes so many of our working
women look old at thirty.

The dissatisfaction that is caused by all the defects of housing is
purely to the good. It is to be wished that the women would all strike
against the vile houses and the antiquated and decrepit implements and
arrangements. Unhappily the women, having known no other, are often
sunk in indifference. When people criticise the folly of teaching
girls to cook on convenient stoves and to housekeep under reasonable
conditions, because everyone knows they never will have convenient stoves
or reasonable conditions, and it will only make them dissatisfied,
I for one hail this dissatisfaction as the one star of hope for the
housewives of the future. For it is quite certain that if the women
are not dissatisfied, the men never will be, and things will never
improve. It is difficult to find the beginning of the vicious circle in
which domestic affairs now are. You are no craftsman if you do not take
pride and joy in your tools, and is it not mockery to ask the English
cottager to take pride in her tools? Think of the crowded condition of
the rooms, so that the Sunday clothes must be kept in the parlour, and
there is no room whatever for storing perishable food, to say nothing of
groceries! Think of the extravagant, ramshackle grates on which these
women are expected to cook appetising food, without which the men will
go to the public-house! Think of the washing on a wet day! The man gets
out of the place as soon as ever he can, and we do not wonder nor blame
him. It seems to me indecent to blame the woman if she succumbs to such
conditions. When she revolts from them, she ought to have the hearty help
and sympathy of every reformer in the land.

So it is not housework that so many women are revolting from. It is
largely the horrible conditions under which so much housework has to be
done. But it is also this: that it is not wise to put all women under one
harrow, and particularly it is foolish to insist on mixing up the notions
of motherhood and housewifery into an inextricable tangle. Because, in
individual homes in the past the woman who bore the children had to cook
and clean and housekeep, it does not follow at all that this must always
be so for ever and ever. Some women who are by no means clever at child
nurture, and who detest housewifery, are capable of bearing excellent
children, beautiful and strong. It would be to impoverish the race to
say such women should not have children (and they and the men who love
them would laugh at you if you did). It would be stupid to sacrifice the
welfare of the children to the incompetent rearing of such women, and
one can only pity the men who have to eat the dinners they cook. Why not
admit frankly that women differ, and always will differ? Why try to press
them all into the same mould? If a woman has been a highly trained and
very competent class-teacher before her marriage, is it wisdom or economy
to declare that, after her marriage, she must abandon all her special
training, her natural and acquired gifts, and black her husbands boots
and cook his dinner? Even if she has babies, is that any reason why she
should become a general servant?

Slowly, very slowly, because everything to do with women is so hedged
round with fears and tabus of all kinds, there is arising the possibility
of co-operative housekeeping and co-operative nurseries. To some
intensely individualistic women these will be a terror; they would
rather slave themselves to death than have a common kitchen or a common
dining-room; and some would not for the world miss one cry of the baby,
one clutch of its little grasping hands. Let these women have their babes
and their households to themselves; why not? But why should the other
women not also have what they want, and do what they can? No one, looking
round the world of men and women, can honestly say that men do as a
matter of fact choose their wives from the girls who love baby-minding,
cooking and cleaning beyond all things. Young men are not thinking
about such things at all when courting, and they go for nothing in the
sex-attraction a girl possesses. We women, if we have lived a good while,
have all known scores of girls left unwed who would have made better
mothers and better housekeepers than those who have married, and in some
cases could have married a dozen times as the saying goes. The fact is
that the perfect wife, mother, nurse, teacher and housekeeper is very
rarely one person.

Girls are less domesticated now, largely because the development of
industry has made them less so. Bread, jams, pickles, candles, hams,
yarn, cloth and clothes that used to be made in the home are now made in
the factory. It seems to me perfectly clear that by degrees much of the
cooking and laundering, even of the poor, will be done on a large scale
by those who receive wages for doing it. The discomfort and unhealthiness
of laundry work in a small cottage, and the waste of time and fuel in
cookery, are manifest to everyone who has ever seen them. There will be
a development of the crche or day nursery in all towns, and eventually
those who love the individualist life will find it best in country
districts, while the towns will be given over to the men and women of
co-operative and gregarious temperaments.

These developments will, of course, bring with them their characteristic
dangers and disadvantages. Neither progress nor stagnation is safe; but
the one is life, the other is death. What is necessary is to face things
as they are and not go on eternally pretending that the world is what it
is not: that women all have sheltered happy homes, if only they would
stay in them; that it is only idleness or perversity which prevents women
from making their own bread (without a suitable oven) and stocking their
own jam (without even a shelf to put it on). We have seen enough of the
very serious disadvantages of modern industrialism to have a shrewd idea
of what the dangers of further development will be, and it would be the
wisest thing for sociologists not to attempt to sweep back the tide, but
to direct its channels for the future.

The divorce of the producer and the consumer has had many bad effects as
well as some good. While people prepared their own food and made their
own clothes and furniture, there was a direct personal incentive to make
them good. This incentive must be replaced by one as strong, or quality
will drop. The modern producer finds it difficult to know what his
enormous public wants, and it profits him to assert, by advertisement,
that what he makes is what the public wants. The consumer is confused and
helpless, disorganised and very open to suggestion. Moreover, the power
of finance, of trusts and combinations, to beat out competitors and to
rig the market, acts more often than not in direct opposition to the
real interests of the consumer. Hence enormous waste of material wealth,
adulteration and shoddy, and the ugliness that comes from bad material
and bad workmanship overlaid with vulgar ornament.

The fact is that, like everything else, housewifery is becoming a matter
of much greater specialisation on the one hand, and on the other the
modern state of affairs requires a modern mind. Collective effort and
political action are in these complicated conditions necessary, and the
purely individualistic attitude of mind is hopelessly old-fashioned. If
woman is to be the housewife of the future, it is the woman of the future
and not of the past who must tackle these questions, and men must give
the woman of the future her head.




CHAPTER X

THE ECONOMIC PROBLEM

(4) THE PROSTITUTE

      Jenny, you know the city now.
    A child can tell the tale there, how
    Some things which are not yet enrolld
    In market lists are bought and sold
    Even till the early Sunday light,
    When Saturday night is market-night
    Everywhere, be it dry or wet,
    And market-night in the Haymarket.

    

      Of the same lump (as it is said)
    For honour and dishonour made,
    Two sister vessels. Here is one.

      It makes a goblin of the sun.

                                    D. G. ROSSETTI.


When considering the reasons for womens lower wages, reference was made
to the fact that women had other sources of income than those derived
from their work; and no discussion of the economic position of women
would be honest which did not take into account the undoubted fact that
women can make more money by the sale of their bodies than in any other
way. This may sound an extreme statement, but it is advisedly made.
Kings have given their mistresses titles, and have made their sons
peers. How many women have been ennobled for any other services? While
a first-class university woman rarely gets a higher salary than five
hundred pounds a year, an illiterate courtesan, if she plays her cards
well and has luck, may dip her hands into millions. The two cynical
volumes of Emil Reich, entitled, _Woman through the Ages_, give proof of
those qualities in woman which man has chosen to reward with the highest
titles and the greatest riches. Every poor sweated girl knows she can in
one night double her weeks wage if she chooses. This is a fact. If we do
not fearlessly face it, we may as well give up talking about the womens
movement, for it will only be play. The clearest knowledge, the closest
thinking, are wanted on the part of women and men; hitherto, except for
those personally involved either as buyers or sellers, knowledge has been
confined to the police (almost entirely occupied with penalising one
only of the two parties to the transactions), to doctors and nurses and
officials of workhouses and asylums of many sorts, and to a small body of
rescue-workers. The list is significant.

It is to be wished that this subject could be approached free from the
falseness of sentimentality. It is not possible, nor is it desirable
to abolish all feeling when we come to act. Feeling is the property of
sentient beings, and actions are not right or wrong quite independently
of their effects on feeling. Women do well to feel intensely in matters
so closely affecting themselves, their sisters, their children and
their husbands. We are sometimes told that women must be kept out of
dealing with these things, because of their emotionalism: yet is it
not the passions and appetites of men which largely create the whole
problem, and are we to believe that men, when they come to making laws
and regulations, forget their passions and appetites, and become as
gods? We all know they do not, and the feeling of women is every bit as
respectable and deserving of attention. So we must feel, and we do well
to feel, when we come to act; but when we are studying the facts,the
deeds of men and of women, and their consequences,it is well to banish
feeling for a time, so that we may _know_ first.

It has been the easy custom of most men to divide women crudely into good
and bad. The good woman is superhuman, and she is a very homogeneous and
monotonous sort of person; the bad woman is subhuman, but often very
amusing and attractive. The good woman is put on a pedestal, where she
finds life very restricted and dull; the bad woman is segregated, either
literally or metaphorically, into compounds, where the delusion is nursed
that she will not infect the good woman, either with her wickedness or
her diseases. This is all unreal and tiresome and stupid and harmful
enough, but there is little to choose between it and a view of woman
which is too often put forward by women themselves, and that is the
view that all women are angels, and so angelic that nothing can corrupt
them. We may reverence the soul in every living person, we may keep our
faith strong in the miraculous power of recovery, we may humbly own that
none of us is entitled to cast a stone, we may even have come to see
that stone-throwing has not a reforming influence, and yet, if we are
honest, we must admit that there are women who have no personal pride
and no reverence for the body: covetous women; cold women, who do not
know the purification of passion; sensual women, who know only appetite;
lazy women; vain women; cowardly women. It is cant to insist that we
must reverence such women, any more than we would reverence covetous,
cold, sensual, lazy, vain or cowardly men. The life of prostitution tends
to encourage all these vices; that is one of the strongest reasons for
hating the life; but, undoubtedly, some persons have more aptitude for it
than others.

The questions we must ask ourselves are: (1) What is prostitution? (2) Is
it an evil? (3) Is it necessary? (4) If it is not necessary, how can it
be checked or prevented?

It is not easy to find a definition of prostitution which will be
accepted by all. I propose to define it as the yielding up for material
advantages only of something which should be given for other purposes.
A man prostitutes his pen if he takes money for writing lies; it is no
prostitution if he accepts money for writing what he believes to be
truth. A woman prostitutes her body when she yields it to a man for
whom she has no love, in return for money; it is not prostitution if
she accepts money from the man she loves. Many other definitions are
possible, but if we take this one, we have to admit that there is a vast
deal of prostitution within the marriage state, and here, in addition to
material advantage, there is often the added sop of social position. Even
when not entered into for gain, the marriage is often persisted in for
that motive. The effects on men and women and children are bad, but no
one has even suggested that reform should be introduced by any methods
other than educational ones: to give every girl the means of earning a
decent livelihood, so that she is not forced into marriage as into a
trade; to encourage reverence for the body and faith in the clean passion
of love in both men and women; to create a healthy public opinion in
which traffic in the appetites is regarded as repulsive, so that it will
be thought as shameful for men to buy as for women to sell gratification;
these are the only possible ways of dealing with loveless marriages. What
is commonly known as prostitution is, however, carried on outside of
marriage, and is promiscuous. It arises from the fact that large numbers
of men either have no wife or find one woman insufficient for their
gratification.

I have said that there are large numbers. Estimates vary enormously
as to what proportion of men resort to prostitutes. More facts are
badly wanted, but the Chicago Vice Commission of 1911, a commission
instituted and carried out by the municipality, states that the number
of prostitutes in the city _who do nothing else_ is approximately 5000.
It is impossible even to estimate the number of casual and clandestine
prostitutes, but they are certainly many. To arrive at some estimate,
the commission takes only the 1012 inmates of certain houses, from whose
books it appeared that there was a nightly average of _fifteen men per
inmate_,[4] and this gives the total of 5,540,700 visits per year.
It does not seem likely that Chicago is singular, and until we have
trustworthy evidence to the contrary, these facts form almost the only
basis for estimating the extent of these practices.

When we come to the question whether prostitution is an evil, we shall
find that some of the consequences are evil in themselves, and some are
evil because of the way society treats them. There can be no possible
doubt that the practice is of the greatest injury to the health of the
women engaged in it. Those who persist in it die young, though here the
Chicago Commission suggests there has been exaggeration. The injury
to the health of the men might be decreased if there were no disgrace
attached to the practice, and if medical advice were always invoked and
carefully followed; there would still, however, be considerable risk to
the health of the men, even if excess were not added, as a cause of
disease. The injury to the health of wives is very grave indeed, and
those who will take the trouble to consult such books as _Social Diseases
and Marriage_, by Prince A. Morrow, M.D., or _Hygiene and Morality_, by
Lavinia L. Dock (Secretary of the International Council of Nurses), will
find there justification enough for the statement that prostitution is
not only _an_ evil, but it is _the_ evil which is felt most disastrously
by women of all ages and classes. It affects the children, who are
afflicted with many ghastly diseases, as a result of their fathers
conduct; it affects the wives, who, besides the moral suffering they
may endure, are frequently rendered barren, and themselves diseased;
it affects all women wage-earners and, through them, men wage-earners.
Concerning the moral evil, a whole book might and I hope will be written,
from a modern standpoint. A great deal of purity-preaching fails because
it is out of touch with modern minds. If you want men to have a horror
of using a woman merely as a convenience, if you want women to resent
such a use of themselves, you will have to replace semi-savage tabus with
science. And this is not to say that religion has nothing to do here. For
those who believe in a God who made things must believe He meant us to
find out His law. There is a sense in which the sneer of the Pharisee is
bare truth, and this people that knoweth not the law _is_ accursed.

People have called it a necessary evil, and we shall do well to inquire
what they mean by necessary, for they generally use it in at least two
senses: (1) necessary for the health of men; (2) a necessary consequence
of the evil nature of men and women. It is impossible to believe that,
if it is necessary for the health of men, it can also be evil. It is
impossible to believe that a state of affairs can be natural in which
the health of men can only be secured by the degradation, barrenness,
disease and early death of women and children. Prostitution in itself
is degrading to both sexes, and cannot be necessary. What people mean
is that sexual intercourse is necessary for the health of men, and that
if they cannot have enough of it within marriage, it is necessary that
they should have it outside marriage. If we regard marriage as a divine
institution, it is impossible to believe that a good God would have made
it necessary to desecrate this divine institution. If we regard marriage
as a human institution, it is for us to adapt it to human needs and so
arrange society that men and women should have the intercourse necessary
for their health. The truth is that sexual intercourse is as necessary
for women as for men, and the opportunity of bearing children just as
much part of the wider scope that we desire for women as opportunities
for education and wage-earning. Because women have always been in
subjection, however, their needs have always been overlooked, and not
only law but custom has ignored them.

If one wife were not sufficient for a man, we should recognise the fact
and not outlaw the women who are rendering a service. There are about 3
millions of unmarried men over 20 in England. Since we know that a very
large proportion of them do not forgo sexual intercourse, this argues
an immense discrepancy between our professions with regard to marriage
and our performance. If social conditions were altered, should we not
find that a large number of women at present unmarried would be willing
to enter into relations of love and affection with men, and might not
this greatly diminish the necessity for prostitutes? We can most of us
imagine a state of things infinitely preferable to the present, in which
the virginity of some 3 millions of women is secured by the holocaust
of the remaining quarter of a million, and all the attendant evils and
disasters to the rest of humanity. What does the bachelor condition of so
many men betoken? That they cannot, or will not undertake marriage. Is
it not time that some serious thought were given to finding out what is
wrong with marriage, or with women, or with men, or with all three?

But when necessary is used to signify the necessary consequence of
evil human nature, there is some truth in that; if we add, and of
evil human institutions, we may say that we have got the whole truth.
If human nature and human institutions are evil in this direction, can
we not alter them? Women certainly will not be content, with their
new knowledge and their growing powers, to sit down helpless before
these evils. We may be quite certain that they are going to move very
seriously, and it is to the interests of men and of the whole community
that there should be sympathy and understanding and co-operation between
men and women reformers. Women must beware of allowing themselves to be
infected, when they obtain more power, with the brutality which has for
ages robbed law of its moral sanctions, or with the legalism which has
robbed conduct of the grace of the spirit. The social evil is largely
the result of brutality, and brutal punishments are no remedy, even if
you can persuade men to inflict them. We do relapse periodically into
brutality, such as the introducing of flogging into a recent Act. But
it is remarkable that this particular lapse occurred in a measure that
had been hung up for a very long time and that was terribly overdue;
therefore feeling was exasperated and the measure was finally pushed
through on a wave of emotionalism when Members of Parliament scarcely
dared oppose the flogging, lest they should be accused of sympathy with
the offenders. One could not help feeling that a good many men found, in
the easy enactment of flogging, relief from the necessity of thinking
out and carrying out the far more difficult and searching reforms which
might have some permanent effect. The flogging clause was detestable,
both for what it did and for what it prevented being done. It is a matter
for regret that women did not oppose it, as women; but brutality has
had its effect on them too. If women were admitted to full citizenship
there might be more hope that reforms could be carried gradually and
thoughtfully. As it is, women must be excused for seizing any temporary
breeze of emotionalism (such as was caused by the death of W. T. Stead)
to move on their ship of reform from the doldrums where it lies neglected.

It is not reasonable to say off-hand that legislation can do nothing to
diminish the social evil, and a good deal of nonsense is talked about not
making men good by Act of Parliament. The causes of prostitution are very
many and complex, and though direct repressive legislation has always
been worse than useless, because its only effect has been to harry and
persecute and degrade still further the unhappy women, yet there are many
directions in which legislation could touch the causes.

The movement, now already strongly on the way, for further knowledge
is one of the most hopeful of all. Most thinking people are now agreed
that children should be taught the nature of their bodies, and respect
and care for them, and the only questions are how to give the teaching,
by whom and at what age. Adult women, as well as men, should also know
something of the pathology of sex, so that they can guard themselves, and
so that men may realise more than they do now the fearful suffering which
their excesses entail on the innocent. Purity has been preached to boys
and men far too much as a vague ideal. If the results of lust appeared
to them in their true form of hideous cruelty and cowardice, it would
make the most thoughtless pause. Girls must no longer be taught that
subservience and sacrifice to men is womans virtue; boys must be taught
to take a pride in a womans pride, achievement and independence. The
incredibly mean jealousy of these which we frequently see, has its roots
far back in childish days when only a girl was a phrase that passed
unrebuked by the mother. If a girl has not learned to value herself,
to respect her own body and soul, and dedicate them to some worthy
purpose, what wonder if she sells for cash that for which she herself
has so little value? The cult of the womanly woman is for much in the
venality of women. Besides this property of whispering humbleness, she is
to be all softness and weakness and yielding grace, and she is to be so
unlettered and inexperienced that the veriest scoundrel can impose upon
her. The law does much to encourage this low status of women, and until
women have attained full citizenship, it is not to be wondered at if
young men grow up with a slight contempt for them.

The fact that a woman can sell herself tends, as we have seen, to keep
womens wages down, and the temptation to add to her income is increased
by the low wages. This is a vicious circle, from which escape can only
be made by raising wages, since you cannot directly stop prostitution.
The fact that men will probably always be richer than women, and that
men very much desire women, will perhaps always prevent the total
disappearance of prostitution, but at least we know that if we make
it possible for every woman to live decently, there will be an immense
reduction. It is in the highest degree unlikely that there are many women
who would deliberately choose the horrible life. They drift, fall and
are pushed into it and then cannot get out. One hears stories of actual
starvation leading to it. These may be true, but there are far more cases
(and this is proved by the fact that domestic servants and daughters
at home form the largest classes of recruits) where the natural love
of pleasure and finery, the natural sex attraction, and in many cases
aversion from hard or monotonous work have been the temptations. It is an
appalling thought that these, which are, at worst, faults and weaknesses,
should be seized hold of by men, to make, of what should be a woman

    A cipher of mans changeless sum
    Of lust, past, present and to come,

a creature whom law and society combine to treat as subhuman, a thing,
not a person.

Much indiscriminate abuse is hurled by sentimentalists at the
mistresses of households who discharge a servant leading an immoral or
irregular life, and many most worthy mistresses, feeling acutely their
responsibilities for young maids, and knowing of many temptations,
endeavour, by severe restrictions, to keep the girls straight. Both
seem to me mistaken. Employers of male labour do not keep workmen and
pay them good wages when they do their work badly. Especially not when
their delinquencies are voluntary. And the mistress of a household has
not only to consider the amount of work she is getting in return for the
wages she pays, she has also the grave responsibility of considering all
the other inmates of her house, the fellow-servants and her own family,
and the effect upon them of the presence, as a member of the household,
of a woman of loose character or conduct. It is almost always the best
thing for the woman herself to make a change in her life. But when we
come to the efforts of so many mistresses to keep their girls straight by
denying them pleasure, or prescribing to them the exact kind of pleasure
and refusing them liberty, these efforts appear often pathetically
misdirected, and only increase the contrast between the girls actual
life and what the tempter promises her. It is natural for a girl, whether
she be a servant or a young lady, to have a young man. The young lady
can see her young man as much as she likes, in drawing-rooms and at
legitimate entertainments; the servant, too often, can see her young man
only by stealth, alone, in the dark roads, on the bench of a park, or in
houses where there is little of the control of normal family life. And
her interviews with him are full of angry revolt against her mistresss
prohibition, and of plots with him as to how to circumvent the tyrant.
The said tyrant is often desperately perplexed and anxious, but worse
than helpless, because of her ignorance and her sometimes wilful refusal
to admit the facts of human nature. I have known a woman who said, I
dont allow my girl to go anywhere without me, except to church and to
the G.F.S.; but I had myself met the girl in a variety of other places.
Another employer, with two daughters who often went to dances, refused to
allow her pretty parlourmaid (who helped to dress the young ladies) to
go to a ball which her friends and brothers were attending. The employer
thought balls were not good for that class of person. Another lady, who
was constantly seen at dinner parties, theatres and receptions, said,
when asked that her servant should be allowed to join a social club,
where there was singing and dancing and acting and billiards, I dont
believe you can help that class of people except through religion. Such
employers as these, and they are very many, bring into disrepute not
only the employment of domestic service, but the whole of the standard
of morals which they imagine themselves to be upholding. Young people
will have pleasure if they can get it, and to make their lives dreary and
lonely is to drive them underground for pleasure and for companionship.
The desolate loneliness of many domestic servants, far from home and
friends, and with well-meaning, puritanical mistresses, is a cause
perhaps quite as effective as service in a disorderly house or with an
immoral master. The living-in system is full of difficulties, and I
believe it is one of the systems which will have to go; but the only
chance of success is either to make the girl a part of the family she
serves, or to give her opportunities for a cheerful life of her own.

Another contributory cause, whose effect it is very difficult to
estimate, is the low state of public opinion, encouraged by the law, with
regard to physical brutality. Science recognises the close connection
between the lusts of cruelty and of sex. Public opinion must be brought
to support far more truly protective law for women and for little
children. We hear much just now of the segregation of feeble-minded
women, but we need, just as much, the segregation of men who have become
a danger to women and children. When women make public opinion much
more than they do now, and if only they will steer clear of retaliatory
brutality, we shall move much faster.

Again, consider what endless ripples of effects there will be when once
we begin seriously to tackle the housing question. What is the use of
talking about decency, when a girl or boy has never known it? When the
conditions of their daily life from childhood have been such as to make
decency and continence things never experienced?

Alcohol taken in excess loosens all the powers of inhibition, and
increases the appetites. When by improvements in the living conditions of
the masses we have tackled the disease of alcoholism, we shall find we
have made some way in other directions too.

It is a frequent easy generalisation that a bad woman is much worse
than a bad man. It is said that there is always hope for a fallen man
and none for a fallen woman. We shall have to be given far more proof of
this than we have ever had, before we will believe that it is a property
inherent in the sexes. If we must admit that we do not know how much of
the virtue of women is due to the severe penalties on vice, we must also
admit that we do not know how much of the incurable badness of women is
due to these severe penalties; for society makes it next to impossible
for a fallen woman to rise, whereas society does not trouble itself
even to know whether a man is fallen or not. When women think these
matters out, they will come to the conclusion that where it takes two to
commit an offence, the one who escapes scot-free and attempts to leave
the other to bear the double penalty, is perhaps the greater criminal of
the two. If two boys steal apples together and A escapes, leaving B to be
birched, public opinion is apt to think A rather a mean lad. If, instead
of receiving one birching, B were flogged daily for the rest of his life
because of As delinquency, what would public opinion say of A? or of the
wisdom of the schoolmaster? Prostitution will diminish when it is made
possible for women to recover lost ground; when a silly girl, who has
been enticed away by some man watching for her day of weakness, is not
treated as a pariah or expected to lead a life of penitential expiation
for ever after. The tone which some rescue-workers adopt towards such
girls makes one almost despair. It is an unfortunate thing that, owing
to the painful and distasteful nature of what is called rescue work,
so much of it is in the hands of women of a devoted and often exalted
temperament, which has almost no points of contact with that of the girl
who has drifted into an irregular life. Rescue work should be done by men
and women who realise that the appetite for pleasure is not an unhealthy
appetite, and that affection and a normal family life are the most
hopeful engines of rescue.




CHAPTER XI

THE ECONOMIC PROBLEM

(5) COMMERCIALISED VICE

    And many more Destructions played
    In this ghastly masquerade,
    All disguised, even to the eyes,
    Like Bishops, lawyers, peers, or spies.

    Last came Anarchy: he rode
    On a white horse, splashed with blood;
    He was pale even to the lips,
    Like Death in the Apocalypse.

    And he wore a kingly crown;
    And in his grasp a sceptre shone;
    On his brow this mark I saw
    I AM GOD, AND KING, AND LAW!

                       _The Mask of Anarchy_, P. B. SHELLEY.


Emil Reich, writing in 1908, said (_Woman through the Ages_, vol. ii.
p. 247): The women of the East lie under an adamant yoke of complete
severity. It is in the West that the only movement comes, a movementat
its mistaken bestwhich makes a crusade against prostitution, alcoholism,
and war; all of which must exist as hideous necessities and which, if
they could be swept away, would, in their disappearance, utterly upset
the balance of civilisation. On the previous page he has asserted that
the subordination of women is invariably one of the prices of Empire.
Many women will also see in the enslavement of women the chief cause
of the decay of Empires, and will hold that a civilisation which is
balanced on prostitution, alcoholism and war is in a state of unstable
equilibrium. They will be confirmed in this belief by the extraordinary
state of panic into which Imperialists so often get about the Empire,
which is so delicate that it must be sheltered from every breath of
popular opinion. A healthy Empire should normally be in a condition of
stable equilibrium, to which it returns after any shocks, and there is no
manner of doubt that women want to abolish the notoriously rickety three
legs of which Dr. Reich was so proud.

In themselves no one is found to recommend these three objects of mans
solicitude. Even Dr. Reich calls them hideous. It is, then, merely the
impossibility of abolishing them that we are invited to accept, and it is
too much to ask energetic and active women to accept hideous things,
without ever having been given the chance of abolishing them, or even
seriously diminishing them, especially when it is women who bear by far
the greater weight of this hideous burden.

Now these three things are in their origin due to human appetites; these
appetites have, by indulgence, by stimulation, and by exploitation,
become lusts which, far more truly than any reform, do threaten the
extinction of the Empires which are allowing themselves to be eaten up
with them. It is with the stimulation and exploitation that this chapter
more especially deals. Natural appetite may be gross, may even be brutal,
but in simple communities where each individual must rely on his own
strength for his own livelihood, it tends to return to a norm which is
that of health. Appetite, stimulated with every artifice of advertisement
and allurement, exploited by every financial and commercial profiteer,
becomes in crowded communities a gnawing ulcer, destroying bone and
nerve and tissue, body and soul. To walk the streets and frequent the
amusements of any great modern townLondon or Vienna or Parisis to find
oneself in the midst of a perfect obsession of the lusts of the flesh. An
enormous amount of what passes for art has no design but that of inciting
appetite. Music halls and musical comedies, farces, picture-palaces,
advertisement posters, repeat the same tedious, banal, hideous assaults.
If you are incapable of responding, you are nauseated and bored beyond
expression; but it is clear that the jaded nerves of many people can be
whipped into response. There are many people who are so flaccid that they
invariably succumb to the fixed idea. The profiteer knows this, and the
idea is fixed by every device that capital can contrive.

Take the lust of alcoholism. What chance has the feeble will to escape
its lure? Have we not given The Trade a solidarity which must be the
envy of mere purveyors of necessities? (Mr. Justice Channell said
before the Jury Commission that a special jury very often consists
half of publicans.) Have we not connected light and entertainment and
conviviality with the vice of drunkenness? Have we not refused to allow
people even the right to protect themselves against the unwelcome
intrusion of the temptation into their neighbourhood? Do not our plays
exhibit drunkenness as laughable and lovable in men? (It is significant
that they are not so in women.) We have allowed the traffic in alcohol
to become a vested interest which controls the lives of the people,
and it is to the interest of this traffic that the people should not
become sober. Will the traffickers not use their control to prevent the
people becoming sober? You cannot make men and women sober by Act of
Parliament? Perhaps not. Need you give such vast power to those whose
profit lies in making men and women drunk?

Take the lust of sex. If alcoholism is stimulated in many ways, it is
as nothing compared with the incessant appeals to lust. We all hear of
the profits from the drink traffic. We are only beginning to hear of the
profits from the traffic in women, which are often closely bound up with
the profits of drink. But we must insist on knowing very much more than
we do about these profits. The Chicago Commission asserts that in their
belief Chicago is far better proportionately to its population than most
of the other large cities of the country, and this statement is based
upon a careful study of fifty-two of the largest cities. In this city of
Chicago (with a population of two millions) prostitution, they assert,
is a Commercialised Business of large proportions with tremendous
profits of more than fifteen million dollars (over 3,000,000) per year,
controlled largely by men, not women. Separate the male exploiter from
the problem and we minimise its extent and abate its flagrant outward
expression. In addition we check an artificial stimulus which has been
given to the _business_ so that larger profits may be made by the men
exploiters.

A Committee of Fourteen, which made inquiry in New York City, declared:
Some of the profit-sharers must be dispensed with through the force
of public opinion or by means of heavy penalties, before the growth of
vice can be checked. These include those who profit off the placethe
landlord, agent, janitor, amusement dealer, brewer, and furniture dealer;
those who profit off the actthe keeper, procurer, druggist, physician,
midwife, police officer, and politician; those who profit off the
childrenemployers, procurers, and public service corporations; those
who deal in the futures of vicepublishers, manufacturers, and vendors
of vicious pictures and articles; those who exploit the unemployedthe
employment agent and employers; a group of no less than _nineteen_,
middle-men, who are profit-sharers in vice. It is evident that if
so many people can make a profit, this constitutes a temptation to
exploiters, and if the business could be made unprofitable, it would be
greatly reduced. Demand creates supply. Some of the demand comes from the
natural lustfulness of men. But this is immensely stimulated by those
who make profits, and the supply is secured very largely by fraud and
deception, by persistent siege, by the ruining of girls under promise of
marriage. In Chicago the average wage of a shop girl is six dollars a
week; it takes at least eight dollars a week to support life there; the
prostitute can make twenty-five dollars a week. Yet even so, she could
not be secured in sufficient numbers without the carefully calculated
traffic. A prominent social worker in Chicago said in his evidence: A
lot can be done, if we believe that a very large percentage of those who
pass through a period of prostitution are capable of climbing upward
instead of downward by the momentum of their own better nature. We will
have to change our theory about the woman criminal, if we are going to
save her. And if the woman is a prostitute, it is only through (1) the
uncontrolled passion of youth, and (2) financial stress. To my mind
she can fight both of these, but she cant fight those and the added
damnation of the saloon and the cool, sagacious business man, who simply
stands by and drains her for profit. She could break through the economic
dangers and the physical temptations if you will give her a chance, but
when you make her fight alcohol and capitalisation, she has no show.

We see from these accounts, then, that the demand comes from men, and
that the supply is largely procured by men for business purposes. In
England when a procurer is caught, he or she is sent to jail, but the men
who finance the procurer and the men who are her clients are shielded.
Who can doubt that when women know these things and are admitted to full
citizenship, there will be a change of public opinion all along the lines
that feed the supplyeconomic and educational? The Chicago Commission
in apportioning the blame, says: The Commission has refrained from
unnecessary criticism of public officials. Present-day conditions are
better in respect to open vice than the city has known in many years.
But they are by no means a credit to Chicago. However, this must be
remembered, they are not unique in the history of the city. Present-day
public officials are no more lax in their handling of the problem than
their predecessors for years; as a matter of fact, the regulations
respecting flagrant and open prostitution under the present police
administration, are more strict in tone, and repressive in execution
than have been issued or put in operation for many years. Public opinion
has made no united demand for a change in the situation. The Commission
feels, therefore, that all public officials who are equally responsible
for the present conditions are equally open to criticism. Further,
that _the greatest criticism is due the citizens of Chicago_ (italics
mine), first, for the constant evasion of the problem, second, for their
ignorance and indifference to the situation, and third, for their lack
of united effort in demanding a change in the intolerable conditions as
they now exist. If ignorance and indifference in the mass of citizens
are the ultimate causes, may we not find in the fact that only men are
citizens one of the causes of this ignorance and indifference? You can
rouse the country on an election cry of slavery, if it is the slavery
of men. The far worse slavery of women is no profitable election cry. Do
our anti-suffrage politicians never think of the reason for this? It is a
fine commentary on the Chivalry of which they prate.

And, lastly, we come to the traffic in war. The recent exposure in
Germany of such traffic among armament manufacturersan international
traffic like that in womenhas reminded us of the extraordinary folly
of allowing private firms to manufacture the actual implements of war.
Of course there are many other necessities of war over which it is
impossible to have control, but at least the manufacture of warships and
guns and ammunition should not be let out of the hands of the government.
Here again the sovereign remedy, as in so many other matters, is light,
knowledge. When the working man, who is regarded as food for powder,
knows in whose interests wars are made, how contrived, financed, and
timed, it will not be so easy to catch him with the bait of rhetoric. It
will be still less easy to catch women. In the _Labour Leader_ of 24th
July 1913 there appeared an article giving a list of thirty-five aviation
companies, many of which expect to share in the boom that will be given
to the trade by orders from the war-departments of various governments.
Here we have a baby industry reposing most of its hopes of profit not on
the use men may make of this wonderful discovery for the enlargement of
life, but for the spreading of death. Truly it looks as if the glorious
inventions of the sovereign mind of man would continue to be accursed
until man acknowledges his fellow-sovereign.




CHAPTER XII

THE MANS WOMAN: WOMANLY

    A woman capable at all points to bear children, to guard them,
    to teach them, to turn them out strong and healthy citizens
    of the great world, stands at the farthest remove from the
    finnikin doll or the meek drudge whom man by a kind of false
    sexual selection has through many centuries evolved as his
    ideal.EDWARD CARPENTER.


What new contribution have women to offer the world in return for their
emancipation? In the womens movement there is a strong feeling that
under the influence of the dominant male, women have had to conform to
an ideal not their own, and that this forcible compression of all women
into one mouldand that a mould not of their own choosinghas been bad
for women, and therefore bad for womens work, and in the end bad for
men. In order to come to a clearer view of whether this is so or not, I
propose in this chapter and the next to treat of the mans woman and the
womans woman. Everybody would probably agree that there is a very great
distinction, and that, taking them in the mass, the qualities which women
love and admire in women are not the same as those which, in the past,
have most attracted men. This does not matter so much if the conditions
of society be such as to make it possible for women to be independent of
their attraction of men. But if women are kept dependent upon men for any
scope or freedom or joy of life, then there may be imposed upon them an
alien standard which may very seriously cripple them. It is unnecessary
to labour the point that in sexual relations the qualities which make
each sex attractive to the other will always be of importance. What the
progressive women deprecate is that all their chances in life should be
dependent on sexual charm, and some of them badly crave for a rest from
sex, and they desire to be just broadly human.

Generally speaking, the conception of women which is the relic of
barbarism is that they are not themselves human beings, but only related
to human beings. In his sacred books man has taken care to suggest that
woman was an afterthought of the Creator, and that she was given to man
in a sense in which man was not given to woman. He could have her and
hold her by force, and what he asked of her were the qualities agreeable
to himself. Since every man has been a child and has some slight memories
of childhood, the notion of certain motherly qualities being desirable in
woman has existed side by side with the notion of other qualities more
adapted to adult requirements; but since memory is faint, and present
desire strong, the motherly qualities in a woman are of secondary
attractive force to most men in determining their choice, though,
undoubtedly, once mated, a man finds the motherly qualities invaluable.
Men write books and poems about the beauty and sacredness of motherhood,
but if one looks round the world one lives in, one finds that men are,
for the most part, not charmed by the motherly qualities in women, and
that the women upon whom men have in the past lavished titles and jewels
and wealth are not the motherly type at all. Every woman who has lived
long in the world has known many women most richly endowed for motherhood
who have not attracted any men worthy to be their mates, and has known
other women, with few of the qualities needed for motherhood, who have
strung the hearts of a score of men round their necks as trophies. One
might make a very good case to show that, in relation to men, there are
really three types of women: (1) those who attract men, (2) those by whom
men say they are attracted, (3) those by whom men ought (for the greatest
happiness of the greatest number) to be attracted.

Ask the average man what he means by a womanly womantake Mr. Austen
Chamberlain: Their qualities which we most admire are their lofty
devotion to ideals, _their dependence upon others_, upon husband, or
brother, or the hero of their imaginations, their _willingness to yield
their opinions_, their almost _passionate desire for self-sacrifice_,
often, it must be admitted, on behalf of objects very little worthy of
their great devotion (12th July 1910, Debate on the Second Reading of
the Conciliation Bill). He proceeded to declare that these were not
_political_ virtues, and added, God forbid that they should abandon
their qualities, which are our pride and theirs! It seems clear that if
women generally are willing to yield their opinions to unworthy persons,
it is safer not to give this disastrous tendency much practical scope,
but what is really illuminating is Mr. Chamberlains nave confession
that he _likes_ women to be this sort of fools. These are the qualities
that are agreeable to himself, provided he can prevent women from
exercising their dangerous preference for unworthy objects. One wonders
if it has never occurred to Mr. Chamberlain that one reason why women
crave direct representation is that they recognise that men are often
devoted to women who are very little worthy, and that when men tell
them they consult women, and we inquire what women? we discover
that they are not those whom women themselves would consult or trust or
follow. There is this foundation at least for the frequent statement that
women do not wish to be ruled by women. They do not wish to be ruled by
women who have been selected by men, because they know from experience
that a mans woman and a womans woman are not the same.

If we examine the qualities of Mr. Chamberlains womanly woman, we find
that they are quite frankly selected for his own satisfaction, and not
because they are of any use either to woman herself or to the world. He
likes a woman to be dependent on a man; he likes her to give up her own
opinions; he likes her to sacrifice herself, even although it be often on
unworthy objects. What does the dependence of a woman on a man and her
yielding of her opinions to him involve? It involves the misunderstanding
and neglect of all the specifically womanly sides of life. The woman who
yields her belief to a man, not by conviction, but by submission, is
shirking her work, and is a traitor to the future of which she is the
guardian. She is, in fact, the _un_womanly woman, for she has yielded the
fruits of her instinct, her knowledge, her experience as a woman, and has
adopted, to command, a mans opinion based on mans instinct, knowledge
and experience. She is aping man and is (what the reactionaries falsely
call the progressive woman), in truth, a feeble imitation.

Dependence of this sort means degradation. There is a sense, of course,
in which we are all, of necessity, dependent upon each other, men upon
women and women upon men. But the sort of dependence which means that
men do all they do for women as grace and favour, but that women do all
they do for men from subjection and compulsion,because they cant help
themselves,is degrading to both men and women. One knows the exquisite
delight there is in serving or being served by a beloved person; but all
women do not love all men, and there is no joy whatever in dependence
upon those whom you do not love. Even the pleasure to be derived from
dependence on a loved one is a purely personal matter, and varies with
individuals and with times, and is not proper matter upon which to base
institutions.

As a matter of fact, women down all the ages have escaped from the
degradation of entirely becoming faint echoes of men by the lesser
degradation of humbugging and lying to men. Men have wanted them to
yield their opinions? Very well, they would pretend to do so. But the
true woman never did. She was true to the greater reality of sex. Now
women are revolting against the necessity of telling even the lesser
lie, and are insisting that they want to do their work unhampered by
ignorance and meddling. If we take a large part of womens work as being
essentially social, the bearing and rearing of children, education and
the care of the human family in all its wide interests of health and
morality, how can anyone in their senses assert that a woman who has not
the education and culture to know and appreciate facts is as helpful as
one who has them? Yet progressives have had to fight reactionaries for
every bit of education and culture. How can anyone think that a woman
who suppresses her deep and peculiar knowledge of childhood is as good
a mother, teacher, nurse as the woman who bravely follows the light? Or
with the sympathy and insight that women have into sickness of souls
and bodies, can anyone really believe that the worlds work of healing
and redemption is best done if the fruits of this sympathy and insight
are packed into baskets and handed over to men who, with all the other
matters about which they are so much keener on their hands, will just
forget the baskets and allow the fruits to rot?

There is in womenno one can doubt it who has studied their worksa
peculiar combination of idealism and practicality. The one without the
other is either vapid or dry: the two together can move mountains. What
distinguished the work of Elizabeth Fry, of Florence Nightingale, of
Octavia Hill, of Lady Henry Somerset is just this combination. What makes
the reports of the women factory inspectors so much more interesting than
those of the men is again the same combination. When men in the House of
Commons discuss the Housing Question, or what they call Education, the
dulness of the debate is enough to send one to sleep. Why is it so dull?
Because it lacks both actuality and ideality. Once the speakers have lost
sight altogether of the child, and can begin to fight each other on the
so-called religious question, they are at home, and the House fills; once
they can leave off talking about the houses which are the homes of the
people and the workshops of the mothers, and get to quarrelling about
some party cry, they begin to revive. The fact is, that anyone worth his
or her salt is keen about his or her job. The more you separate your
legislative and executive powers from your intelligence department the
more you weaken those powers, and mens legislation and administration is
largely divorced from womens intelligence.

When the fight has been made and has been justified by its success, we
are all ready to acclaim the fighter, but we seem unable to grasp the
principle which the fight ought to have established. Florence Nightingale
was invited to go to Scutari by a broad-minded man who had faith in
what she could do; but when she got out there, she found the usual
reactionaries, and unless she had insisted upon having a position of
undisputed authority, she would have accomplished only a small fraction
of her great work. She braved the authorities, and broke open the cases
of stores which were sealed with red tape. We are all ready nowprobably
even Mr. Austen Chamberlainto acclaim Florence Nightingale as a womanly
woman. But where was her dependence, her willingness to yield her
opinions? And another point is most deserving of note. This is, that
when men do get a real live woman, born to warn, to comfort and command
among them, and have had time to get over the first little shock to their
prejudices, they find what an admirable colleague or chief they have
gotten, and are generous in their service and co-operation. Men are, in
fact, almost always better far than their apologists will allow them to
be.

In private life men must have always experienced the value of the
strong-natured woman. Only some are still faithless about the value of
such women in public life. They are afraid, afraid for their masculine
prerogative, afraid (as I have heard it expressed) that women will
legislate men out of existence. Well, the antidote to that is surely
more co-operation between men and women, not less; more knowledge and
understanding of each others point of view, not less. So many men are at
present greatly concerned to keep women to their duty; perhaps many women
are also too much concerned to keep men to their duty. There is all to be
gained by putting together these aspirations for the improvement ofother
people!

In an earlier chapter I have shown the danger that there lies in the low
status of women in their not having pride in themselves and confidence in
their work. The clinging dependence, the softness, the approachableness,
the complaisance which men find so attractive in women also have their
very great dangers. Women who have devoted themselves to the salving of
the wrecks of womanhood know that often it has been this very softness
of fibre which has been the cause of a girls undoing. Be weak! men
cry; we love you for it. It makes us feel superior! And when they
have loved after their fashion, they leave the human wreckage their
love has made and pass on to love again elsewhere. It is as you love
duckling, and cry, Dilly, Dilly, come and be killed! Now women are
increasingly feeling that it is not womanly to be weak, it is womanly to
be strong, strong for work and love and understanding.

The individual man may want individual woman to be weak for him only, but
the laws which men together make require women to be strong, not even
as women, but as superwomen. Because men have experienced the use of
women as individuals, because they still have relics of the old barbaric
ownership feeling, they desire still to keep women individual, isolated,
unorganised. Now even if a woman, by her mother wit, influence and powers
of cajoling and tormenting, may be supposed capable of dealing with her
individual man, the situation becomes very different when man begins to
band himself together with man in guilds, unions, corporations, parties
and armies. He can then proceed to crush women by his organisations.
The individual appeal of love and family is powerless against the
impersonality of law, the combination of millions of persons all of
one sex. It is curious to note that, though men have been organising
themselves for centuries, and for the most part rigidly excluding women
from their organisations, yet women have not complained, nor suggested
that this was anti-woman; on the contrary, they have universally done
what they could to help the mens organisations. But now that women are
beginning to organise themselves, there is raised here and there and
everywhere the alarm cry of Anti-man! and sentimental appeals are made
to women which are totally inappropriate in this connection.

Mr. Harold Owen falls into this mistake when he says (_Woman Adrift_,
p. 234): The relations between man and woman are not political or even
social, they are personal in the highest degree, and in a kind that
exists in no other relation of life whatever. Such a mistake, like
another of which mention has already been made, is only possible by the
use of the rhetorical singular, and even then it does not follow that,
because _a_ man and _a_ woman may have personal relations, there are not
social and political matters of the greatest moment involved in those
relations. That there are, man has acknowledged ages back, by making laws
to regulate the relations of men and women. We know that a woman has no
personal relations at all with the millions of men who govern the world
she has to live in, and we resent the misplaced appeal to sentiment of a
personal kind in such a connection. Social, political, racial sentiment
there may be, but personal sentiment can only exist between individuals,
and all sentiment is not good either,the sentiment of power and
ownership, for instance, when they are held over human beings.

The reactionary man is very fond of asserting that women dont want
this, that or the other. He generally can give no reason for this
statement; enough that he knows it. When it is pointed out to him that
all articulate and organised women do want it and say so, he declares
contemptuously that these women dont count. It is not womanly to
organise. Everyone knows that the traditional woman, the womanly woman,
cant organise. Therefore these hundreds of thousands of organised women
are unsexed, negligible, not to be listened to. The only woman to be
listened to is the quiet woman in the home, and man will go forth into
the world and proclaim what that quiet woman wants, and will give it to
her. It does not seem to dawn upon him that it is more than a little
suspicious that he should pronounce all those to be negligible who can
speak for themselves.




CHAPTER XIII

THE WOMANS WOMAN: A PERSON

     And, if we think of it, what does civilisation itself rest
    uponand what object has it, with its religions, arts, schools,
    etc., but rich, luxuriant, varied Personalism? To that all
    bends, and it is because toward such result Democracy alone, on
    anything like Natures scale, breaks up the limitless fallows
    of humankind, and plants the seed, and gives fair play, that
    its claims now precede the rest.WALT WHITMAN, _Democratic
    Vistas_.


In the last chapter mention was made of the tyranny of an ideal. Man
thinks of the qualities he finds desirable in a woman and compounds an
ideal woman out of these qualities, and then proceeds to call unsexed
the real women of flesh and blood who do not conform or pretend to
conform to this ideal. The older women have very naturally helped him to
maintain these ideals; they were reared in them, and they have feared
lest it might be difficult to find provision for their daughters, unless
they kept the daughters strictly to the dedicated ways. They were wrong,
as timid people nearly always are wrong. The free woman, with a character
and a will of her own, is not only happier and more useful, but she is
proving herself far more attractive than the colourless submissive ideal.

We have been wearied out with talk of the ideal woman, and now there
comes a change, but it is more apparent than real. We hear now a good
deal about a person called by the name of Normal Woman. Men who have done
good work in some particular corner of scientific research have been
largely responsible for the respect with which this talk about Normal
Woman has been received, but when you come to look at her, you will find
that she is merely Ideal Woman dressed up in scientific terms, and that
the author of her being is no other than the Old Adam. It often seems
to me that the common people, with no notion of general principles or
of scientific and philosophic methods, cannot wander so fantastically
far from truth and justice and common humanity as your man of science,
when his sex-vanity has been hurt or his prerogative of pure egoism has
been disturbed. The denunciations of scientific men have, fortunately,
been robbed of many of their terrors by the work of women in biology and
medicine. It would be only human if scientific women showed traces of
their sex in their work, just as men do, but that these are very slight
is suggested by the complaint of Sir Almroth Wright, who declared, in
his widely read letter to _The Times_ (March 1912), that medical women
violated the modesties and reticences upon which our civilisation has
been built up, by putting above these their scientific desire for
knowledge. One has seldom read a more splendid tribute to the courage
and candour of women,a tribute all the more splendid because so entirely
involuntary,for women know how scientific men of the type of Sir Almroth
Wright have made the path of scientific knowledge a very Calvary for
modest women. It is nothing to men of this type that the modesties of our
civilisation should in the past have led to our women being handled and
examined in hospital by youths of the sort common among medical students;
that the reticences of this same civilisation should have led to many
men and nearly all women being ignorant of all that goes to the building
of a healthy and moral nation. Sir Almroth declares that man cannot and
does not wish to work side by side with women. Some men may not, but Sir
Almroth is slandering his own sex when he makes the assertion for all
mankind. The pioneer work of women of science was made possible by the
existence of large numbers of scientific men willing to teach women. We
may make a pretty shrewd guess at the reasons why some scientific men do
not wish women to study science, for have not the medical and scientific
women already, by their work, exploded many of the old fictions about
women, and so put heart and hope into millions of women who felt their
powers, but hardly dared believe in them, because of the dead weight of
what they were told was science? They have now learned that all that is
put forth by a scientific man is not science, and that when sex comes
into his calculations it is apt to be a very serious disturbance to
clear thought. It seems to be a fact that men are as a rule far more
conscious than women of the existence of sex in every relation of life,
and if there be something in the speculations of biologists concerning
the presence of male and female elements in the human female, there may
be a very profound reason for this difference in outlook; but it seems
like midsummer madness to say that the one of the two sexes who is most
homogeneous in the elements of sex shall be the only one who shall have
freedom to know and speculate and experiment, for it is clear that that
one would be the one less likely to have sympathies wide enough to
include both sexes.

What is the line the scientific reactionaries adopt? They abandon Ideal
Woman; they offer you Normal Woman, and she turns out, on investigation,
to be no other than average woman. They take from each woman what is
peculiar or individual, what marks her out as different from other women;
they select what is common to women, sex and motherhood, and they proceed
to say that for sex and motherhood women must live and be trained.
When some half-crazy Strindberg or wholly crazy Weininger asserts that
woman does not exist as a person, he is really only putting clearly
the logical result of this tyranny of thought. It simplifies the side
of life which has no obvious reference to themselves if they can make
pigeon-holes all of one size and shape, label them Normal Woman and
stuff in all the women indiscriminately. But the cruelty and the waste
is seen if we understand how the norm is arrived at. Procrustes bed was
for normal persons. If you measured all the feet of humanity and then
found the average and made one bootthe average bootfor men, women and
children, they would all suffer, but the severest sufferings would be
those of the men with the largest feet. So with the wretched insistence
on making all life to fit the average woman. She doesnt exist; she is
a figment of mens minds, and every single woman suffers in her degree
from the tyranny of the average, but the woman who suffers most is the
biggest woman. The world suffers too, from the stunting or warping or
exasperation of its strongest and most original female minds. One has
only to think of the agony of loneliness of a Charlotte Bront, of the
limiting of her opportunities for equal friendships, for which she had
so rare a genius, of her starvation in experience and in knowledge, and
of the cruel tyranny of hated, because uncongenial, toil. A normal woman
loves children, it is said. Well, Charlotte Bront did not love children;
yet she was forced to teach them, and to wear out her heart over them,
and she cannot even have done it at all well. The children would have
been better taught by someone else. If Charlotte Bront had been given
the same scope to shape her life as Branwell hadmerely because he was
a manher work might have gained by contact with wider life, and she
herself might have lived longer to give us more of it. The stubborn
courage of this woman of genius during years of soul-imprisonment and
starvation should surely help to break down these stupid and wasteful
cruelties.

The enthusiasts for Normal Woman do not entirely deny that here and
there an exceptional woman may suffer from the restrictions of a womans
life, but they suggest that these sufferings are exaggerated, and affect
only the exceptional women, and in any case only matter to the sufferer
herself. It is wonderful with what complacency people can contemplate the
sufferings of others; wonderful, too, the assumption that exceptional
women are negligible, as if it were not, after all, only among the
exceptional that we might hope to find genius. These people will tell
you that women have never done anything which the world would have
missed, except the one work of mothering the race. Therefore to this work
they should be restricted. Women will never, so they say, be anything
but third-rate in arts or sciences or crafts; they can be superlative
mothers; let them concentrate on that. If they do not, it is darkly
suggested that they will lose even the capacity for mothering, and then,
where will they be? And, what is worse, where will men be?

Sometimes these views are advanced with all the thunders of an angry
prophet; sometimes, more in sorrow than in anger, it is suggested that
woman will sooner or later return to weep on the breast of man, and
beg to be allowed, like Katharine, the Shrew, to lay her hand beneath
his foot. To do otherwise would argue in the fair sex (to use the
denunciatory language of Sir James FitzJames Stephen) a base, mutinous
disposition, which we sincerely hope she has not. In the words of Mr.
Garvin (_Pall Mall Gazette_, 30th July 1913), we can only hope that,
whatever the woman of the future may prove to be, some of the womanliness
which we knew when Victoria was Queen will remain in her, and that, when
the first force of revolt is spent, she will once more realise the full
glory of wifehood and motherhood. On that point we have no great fear,
for, whatever her vagaries, woman will remain woman at heart. I should
like to rescue this exquisite piece of fatuity from oblivion, to make
merry the hearts of future generations of men and women.

Now, as regards genius, we may know how much genius women have in some
hundreds of years, when they have been free to develop according to
their natures. The kind of emotional tyranny to which women have been
subjected is the most crushing of all, and men have never had to undergo
this particular sort of tyranny, so that it is not in the least true to
say that if women had had any genius it would have overcome tyranny, as
mens genius has done. No man has ever known what it is to be born of
the more sensitive, sympathetic, conscientious and affectionate sex,
and to be reared in an atmosphere where insult and hate followed on
any expression of genius, where cold discouragement was the best that
a woman could expect from her own people, and where the wooing from
her own work has taken that most insidious of all forms for duty-loving
womanthe claims of others to her care and service. Those who hold the
theory of the norm would, however, exclaim God forbid that women should
become geniuses! We dont _like_ women geniuses, and, moreover, genius
will interfere with motherhood. If one of the necessities for genius
is intense egotism (because no great work can be done without intense
concentration, and this is impossible if the attention is perpetually
switched off in order to do other peoples bidding), there is something
to be said for the notion that genius will interfere with motherhood;
that is to say, with the capacity or the desire of the genius to fulfil
the ordinary functions of motherhood. It is a common assertion that a
woman fulfils herself completely in motherhood, but this is manifestly
not true of the woman who wants to think about the higher mathematics, or
who has a genius for organising masses. This does not dismay me at all.
Why, after all, should the genius be a mother? And if she be, could she
not find motherly women to bring up the children? It is mere delusion
to insist that in all cases, without exception, the mother is the best
person to tend the babies, and no one even suggests that the mother
should be the sole educator of children when they have passed babyhood. I
am not apprehensive that the mass of women will ever become geniuses and
so cease to provide the men and women of the future. It seems clear to
common sense that geniuses will be few, and that it is mere cant for men,
who contemplate quite serenely the existence of several million spinsters
in England, to cry out in dismay at the notion of a singular genius, here
and there, as the mysterious forces of nature may provide. The existence
of these millions of spinsters _is_ an exceedingly serious matter,
because many of them probably desire intensely to be mothers, and would
be good ones; but it is only when the egoistic man fears that the unmated
woman may be active and content, that his sensitive vanity is up in arms,
and he is dismayed at the notion of a woman, of her free choice, forgoing
man. He is content there should be millions of spinsters, if only they
are unhappy.

Perhaps a eugenist will here intervene and say that we want the best
women to be mothers, and therefore the potential genius should sacrifice
her individual opportunity, in order to become the possible mother of
male geniuses. But it will not be easy to persuade the woman of the
future that she should resist the inspiration which she knows she feels,
in order to produce children who may not, and, in fact, probably will
not, possess the inspiration. It is very natural for man to say to woman,
You shall give me not only your love, you shall give me your genius;
but she cannot do it, for in the very dark and difficult problems which
heredity presents to us, it is rare indeed to find a genius the son of a
genius. If George Sand and Elizabeth Barrett Browning had never written
a line, we may doubt exceedingly whether the work of Maurice or of Robert
Barrett would have been any better than it was. I once heard a youthful
politician, now in Parliament, gravely oppose the eligibility of women
to Parliament, on the ground that, if women went into Parliament, their
babies would tumble into the fire. Now, quite apart from the circumstance
that very few of the wives of existing Members of Parliament act all day
and night as fireguards, there was this absurdity that there are only six
hundred and seventy Members of Parliament, and, if they were every one of
them women, there would still be many millions of mothers left to look
after the babies. It mightwe may grant this to the alarmistsbe very
uncomfortable if all women were, or tried to be, geniuses and Members
of Parliament, but the mere fact that they are not forbidden will not
make them all throw their energies in these directions, any more than it
afflicts men so.

Like so much of the talk about women, this about genius is very little
relevant to any practical problem. Even if it were true that women had
never shown, and never would show, genius in art or abstract science,
this is no reason for preventing them from using what ability they
have in the directions they prefer, and it seems very likely that they
have genius in directions hitherto almost forbidden to them; I mean
in organisation, and leadership, and in the power to govern. They
have certainly demonstrated their possession of many of the qualities
upon which the strength of the community is founded, and it is to the
advantage of the community that they should be allowed the free exercise
of those qualities.

Reactionary men of science try to frighten us, however, by maintaining
that the energetic use of any of womans strength is contrary to healthy
and efficient motherhood. They go on making these assertions, in spite
of the fact that women who live a laborious life, provided they are
not starved or neglected when they bring forth children, do it with
far greater ease than women who live in luxury and idleness. They talk
of metabolism and the necessity of a young girl storing up nourishment
during the years of her adolescence, as if a human creature were nothing
but a chemical factory and warehouse rolled into one. By the persistent
and wilful neglect of the mind, they are able to arrive at the most
astounding conclusions, and one wishes one could send them back half a
century to the nursery of those days, and make them learn that Satan
finds some mischief still for idle hands to do. It is not only idle
hands, but idle hearts and minds that are a danger. If a girls mind is
caged and her education concentrated upon sex, it is not mothers you are
rearing, but lunatics, deficients, hystericals, and anmics. The people
who talk as if a girl should be trained from childhood up for motherhood,
quite overlook the very real possibility of tiring out the instinct
before its time of fruition. There are very many girls who would have
had quite a healthy and natural fondness for babies, but who have had
the feeling literally worn out by premature exercise or by sentimental
pawing. A girl-child is not a small woman, and just as we should all
disapprove any attempt to make little fathers of the boys, so we should
disapprove the unhealthy endeavour to make little mothers of the girls.
If there is something pathetic about the small girl drudge, stunted with
carrying about heavy babies, there is something peculiarly offensive
about the prim little girl who rebukes her brothers for tearing their
clothes or dirtying their hands, when she ought herself to be likewise
engaged.

From the Census reports it appears that in England and Wales there are
nearly three and a half million spinsters over twenty years of age;
many of these will never marry, and the cruelty of bringing them up
to a vocation, which they will never be called upon to fulfil, should
be repugnant to all decent feeling, even if it would not in itself
constitute a danger. Such considerations do not trouble the sciolist
with a theory to run, for he calls the maidens a superfluous portion
of the population, or waste products of our female population,[5]
and proceeds to talk as if they could be set aside. But this piece of
Podsnappery would bring its own punishment, if it were widely adopted,
for undoubtedly the parasitic woman would be, in the future, as she has
been in the past, the most deadly enemy of man. The only sex-antagonism
that really exists is that arising from the attempts of one sex to
repress or to get the better of the other. There is, in fact, absolutely
no practicable issue for this way of thinking except the simple plan of
the lethal chamber for the waste products.

The training of women as breeders only, would involve the complete
subjection of women to men, and consequently their complete dependence
on men; it would involve the return to pre-factory days (in itself,
perhaps, no bad thing, only no one knows how to do it), and to a state of
things which has been partly remedied by the Married Womens Property and
Custody of Children Acts; a state in which it was possible to pass and
to administer the infamous Contagious Diseases Acts. It would mean that
