Now see that Noble, and most Soueraigne Reason,
Like sweet Bels iangled out of tune, and harsh,
That vnmatch'd Forme and Feature of blowne youth,
Blasted with extasie. Oh woe is me,
T'haue seene what I haue seene: see what I see.
Enter King, and Polonius.

  King. Loue? His affections do not that way tend,
Nor what he spake, though it lack'd Forme a little,
Was not like Madnesse. There's something in his soule?
O're which his Melancholly sits on brood,
And I do doubt the hatch, and the disclose
Will be some danger, which to preuent
I haue in quicke determination
Thus set it downe. He shall with speed to England
For the demand of our neglected Tribute:
Haply the Seas and Countries different
With variable Obiects, shall expell
This something setled matter in his heart:
Whereon his Braines still beating, puts him thus
From fashion of himselfe. What thinke you on't?
  Pol. It shall do well. But yet do I beleeue
The Origin and Commencement of this greefe
Sprung from neglected loue. How now Ophelia?
You neede not tell vs, what Lord Hamlet saide,
We heard it all. My Lord, do as you please,
But if you hold it fit after the Play,
Let his Queene Mother all alone intreat him
To shew his Greefes: let her be round with him,
And Ile be plac'd so, please you in the eare
Of all their Conference. If she finde him not,
To England send him: Or confine him where
Your wisedome best shall thinke

   King. It shall be so:
Madnesse in great Ones, must not vnwatch'd go.

Exeunt.

Enter Hamlet, and two or three of the Players.

  Ham. Speake the Speech I pray you, as I pronounc'd
it to you trippingly on the Tongue: But if you mouth it,
as many of your Players do, I had as liue the Town-Cryer
had spoke my Lines: Nor do not saw the Ayre too much
your hand thus, but vse all gently; for in the verie Torrent,
Tempest, and (as I say) the Whirle-winde of
Passion, you must acquire and beget a Temperance that
may giue it Smoothnesse. O it offends mee to the Soule,
to see a robustious Pery-wig-pated Fellow, teare a Passion
to tatters, to verie ragges, to split the eares of the
Groundlings: who (for the most part) are capeable of
nothing, but inexplicable dumbe shewes, & noise: I could
haue such a Fellow whipt for o're-doing Termagant: it
outHerod's Herod. Pray you auoid it

   Player. I warrant your Honor

   Ham. Be not too tame neyther: but let your owne
Discretion be your Tutor. Sute the Action to the Word,
the Word to the Action, with this speciall obseruance:
That you ore-stop not the modestie of Nature; for any
thing so ouer-done, is fro[m] the purpose of Playing, whose
end both at the first and now, was and is, to hold as 'twer
the Mirrour vp to Nature; to shew Vertue her owne
Feature, Scorne her owne Image, and the verie Age and
Bodie of the Time, his forme and pressure. Now, this
ouer-done, or come tardie off, though it make the vnskilfull
laugh, cannot but make the Iudicious greeue; The
censure of the which One, must in your allowance o'reway
a whole Theater of Others. Oh, there bee Players
that I haue seene Play, and heard others praise, and that
highly (not to speake it prophanely) that neyther hauing
the accent of Christians, nor the gate of Christian, Pagan,
or Norman, haue so strutted and bellowed, that I haue
thought some of Natures Iouerney-men had made men,
and not made them well, they imitated Humanity so abhominably

   Play. I hope we haue reform'd that indifferently with
vs, Sir

   Ham. O reforme it altogether. And let those that
play your Clownes, speake no more then is set downe for
them. For there be of them, that will themselues laugh,
to set on some quantitie of barren Spectators to laugh
too, though in the meane time, some necessary Question
of the Play be then to be considered: that's Villanous, &
shewes a most pittifull Ambition in the Foole that vses
it. Go make you readie.

Exit Players.

Enter Polonius, Rosincrance, and Guildensterne.

How now my Lord,
Will the King heare this peece of Worke?
  Pol. And the Queene too, and that presently

   Ham. Bid the Players make hast.

Exit Polonius.

Will you two helpe to hasten them?
  Both. We will my Lord.

Exeunt.

Enter Horatio.

  Ham. What hoa, Horatio?
  Hora. Heere sweet Lord, at your Seruice

   Ham. Horatio, thou art eene as iust a man
As ere my Conuersation coap'd withall

   Hora. O my deere Lord

   Ham. Nay, do not thinke I flatter:
For what aduancement may I hope from thee,
That no Reuennew hast, but thy good spirits
To feed & cloath thee. Why shold the poor be flatter'd?
No, let the Candied tongue, like absurd pompe,
And crooke the pregnant Hindges of the knee,
Where thrift may follow faining? Dost thou heare,
Since my deere Soule was Mistris of my choyse,
And could of men distinguish, her election
Hath seal'd thee for her selfe. For thou hast bene
As one in suffering all, that suffers nothing.
A man that Fortunes buffets, and Rewards
Hath 'tane with equall Thankes. And blest are those,
Whose Blood and Iudgement are so well co-mingled,
That they are not a Pipe for Fortunes finger.
To sound what stop she please. Giue me that man,
That is not Passions Slaue, and I will weare him
In my hearts Core. I, in my Heart of heart,
As I do thee. Something too much of this.
There is a Play to night to before the King.
One Scoene of it comes neere the Circumstance
Which I haue told thee, of my Fathers death.
I prythee, when thou see'st that Acte a-foot,
Euen with the verie Comment of my Soule
Obserue mine Vnkle: If his occulted guilt,
Do not it selfe vnkennell in one speech,
It is a damned Ghost that we haue seene:
And my Imaginations are as foule
As Vulcans Stythe. Giue him needfull note,
For I mine eyes will riuet to his Face:
And after we will both our iudgements ioyne,
To censure of his seeming

   Hora. Well my Lord.
If he steale ought the whil'st this Play is Playing,
And scape detecting, I will pay the Theft.
Enter King, Queene, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosincrance,
Guildensterne, and
other Lords attendant with his Guard carrying Torches. Danish
March. Sound
a Flourish.

  Ham. They are comming to the Play: I must be idle.
Get you a place

   King. How fares our Cosin Hamlet?
  Ham. Excellent Ifaith, of the Camelions dish: I eate
the Ayre promise-cramm'd, you cannot feed Capons so

   King. I haue nothing with this answer Hamlet, these
words are not mine

   Ham. No, nor mine. Now my Lord, you plaid once
i'th' Vniuersity, you say?
  Polon. That I did my Lord, and was accounted a good
Actor

   Ham. And what did you enact?
  Pol. I did enact Iulius Caesar, I was kill'd i'th' Capitol:
Brutus kill'd me

   Ham. It was a bruite part of him, to kill so Capitall a
Calfe there. Be the Players ready?
  Rosin. I my Lord, they stay vpon your patience

   Qu. Come hither my good Hamlet, sit by me

   Ha. No good Mother, here's Mettle more attractiue

   Pol. Oh ho, do you marke that?
  Ham. Ladie, shall I lye in your Lap?
  Ophe. No my Lord

   Ham. I meane, my Head vpon your Lap?
  Ophe. I my Lord

   Ham. Do you thinke I meant Country matters?
  Ophe. I thinke nothing, my Lord

   Ham. That's a faire thought to ly betweene Maids legs
  Ophe. What is my Lord?
  Ham. Nothing

   Ophe. You are merrie, my Lord?
  Ham. Who I?
  Ophe. I my Lord

   Ham. Oh God, your onely Iigge-maker: what should
a man do, but be merrie. For looke you how cheerefully
my Mother lookes, and my Father dyed within's two
Houres

   Ophe. Nay, 'tis twice two moneths, my Lord

   Ham. So long? Nay then let the Diuel weare blacke,
for Ile haue a suite of Sables. Oh Heauens! dye two moneths
ago, and not forgotten yet? Then there's hope, a
great mans Memorie, may out-liue his life halfe a yeare:
But byrlady he must builde Churches then: or else shall
he suffer not thinking on, with the Hoby-horsse, whose
Epitaph is, For o, For o, the Hoby-horse is forgot.

Hoboyes play. The dumbe shew enters.

Enter a King and Queene, very louingly; the Queene embracing
him. She
kneeles, and makes shew of Protestation vnto him. He takes her
vp, and
declines his head vpon her neck. Layes him downe vpon a Banke
of Flowers.
She seeing him a-sleepe, leaues him. Anon comes in a Fellow,
takes off his
Crowne, kisses it, and powres poyson in the Kings eares, and
Exits. The
Queene returnes, findes the King dead, and makes passionate
Action. The
Poysoner, with some two or three Mutes comes in againe, seeming
to lament
with her. The dead body is carried away: The Poysoner Wooes the
Queene with
Gifts, she seemes loath and vnwilling awhile, but in the end,
accepts his
loue.

Exeunt.

  Ophe. What meanes this, my Lord?
  Ham. Marry this is Miching Malicho, that meanes
Mischeefe

   Ophe. Belike this shew imports the Argument of the
Play?
  Ham. We shall know by these Fellowes: the Players
cannot keepe counsell, they'l tell all

   Ophe. Will they tell vs what this shew meant?
  Ham. I, or any shew that you'l shew him. Bee not
you asham'd to shew, hee'l not shame to tell you what it
meanes

   Ophe. You are naught, you are naught, Ile marke the
Play.
Enter Prologue.

For vs, and for our Tragedie,
Heere stooping to your Clemencie:
We begge your hearing Patientlie

   Ham. Is this a Prologue, or the Poesie of a Ring?
  Ophe. 'Tis briefe my Lord

   Ham. As Womans loue.
Enter King and his Queene.

  King. Full thirtie times hath Phoebus Cart gon round,
Neptunes salt Wash, and Tellus Orbed ground:
And thirtie dozen Moones with borrowed sheene,
About the World haue times twelue thirties beene,
Since loue our hearts, and Hymen did our hands
Vnite comutuall, in most sacred Bands

   Bap. So many iournies may the Sunne and Moone
Make vs againe count o're, ere loue be done.
But woe is me, you are so sicke of late,
So farre from cheere, and from your former state,
That I distrust you: yet though I distrust,
Discomfort you (my Lord) it nothing must:
For womens Feare and Loue, holds quantitie,
In neither ought, or in extremity:
Now what my loue is, proofe hath made you know,
And as my Loue is siz'd, my Feare is so

   King. Faith I must leaue thee Loue, and shortly too:
My operant Powers my Functions leaue to do:
And thou shalt liue in this faire world behinde,
Honour'd, belou'd, and haply, one as kinde.
For Husband shalt thou-
  Bap. Oh confound the rest:
Such Loue, must needs be Treason in my brest:
In second Husband, let me be accurst,
None wed the second, but who kill'd the first

   Ham. Wormwood, Wormwood

   Bapt. The instances that second Marriage moue,
Are base respects of Thrift, but none of Loue.
A second time, I kill my Husband dead,
When second Husband kisses me in Bed

   King. I do beleeue you. Think what now you speak:
But what we do determine, oft we breake:
Purpose is but the slaue to Memorie,
Of violent Birth, but poore validitie:
Which now like Fruite vnripe stickes on the Tree,
But fall vnshaken, when they mellow bee.
Most necessary 'tis, that we forget
To pay our selues, what to our selues is debt:
What to our selues in passion we propose,
The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.
The violence of other Greefe or Ioy,
Their owne ennactors with themselues destroy:
Where Ioy most Reuels, Greefe doth most lament;
Greefe ioyes, Ioy greeues on slender accident.
This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange
That euen our Loues should with our Fortunes change.
For 'tis a question left vs yet to proue,
Whether Loue lead Fortune, or else Fortune Loue.
The great man downe, you marke his fauourites flies,
The poore aduanc'd, makes Friends of Enemies:
And hitherto doth Loue on Fortune tend,
For who not needs, shall neuer lacke a Frend:
And who in want a hollow Friend doth try,
Directly seasons him his Enemie.
But orderly to end, where I begun,
Our Willes and Fates do so contrary run,
That our Deuices still are ouerthrowne,
Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our owne.
So thinke thou wilt no second Husband wed.
But die thy thoughts, when thy first Lord is dead

   Bap. Nor Earth to giue me food, nor Heauen light,
Sport and repose locke from me day and night:
Each opposite that blankes the face of ioy,
Meet what I would haue well, and it destroy:
Both heere, and hence, pursue me lasting strife,
If once a Widdow, euer I be Wife

   Ham. If she should breake it now

   King. 'Tis deepely sworne:
Sweet, leaue me heere a while,
My spirits grow dull, and faine I would beguile
The tedious day with sleepe

   Qu. Sleepe rocke thy Braine,

Sleepes

And neuer come mischance betweene vs twaine.

Exit

  Ham. Madam, how like you this Play?
  Qu. The Lady protests to much me thinkes

   Ham. Oh but shee'l keepe her word

   King. Haue you heard the Argument, is there no Offence
in't?
  Ham. No, no, they do but iest, poyson in iest, no Offence
i'th' world

   King. What do you call the Play?
  Ham. The Mouse-trap: Marry how? Tropically:
This Play is the Image of a murder done in Vienna: Gonzago
is the Dukes name, his wife Baptista: you shall see
anon: 'tis a knauish peece of worke: But what o'that?
Your Maiestie, and wee that haue free soules, it touches
vs not: let the gall'd iade winch: our withers are vnrung.
Enter Lucianus.

This is one Lucianus nephew to the King

   Ophe. You are a good Chorus, my Lord

   Ham. I could interpret betweene you and your loue:
if I could see the Puppets dallying

   Ophe. You are keene my Lord, you are keene

   Ham. It would cost you a groaning, to take off my
edge

   Ophe. Still better and worse

   Ham. So you mistake Husbands.
Begin Murderer. Pox, leaue thy damnable Faces, and
begin. Come, the croaking Rauen doth bellow for Reuenge

   Lucian. Thoughts blacke, hands apt,
Drugges fit, and Time agreeing:
Confederate season, else, no Creature seeing:
Thou mixture ranke, of Midnight Weeds collected,
With Hecats Ban, thrice blasted, thrice infected,
Thy naturall Magicke, and dire propertie,
On wholsome life, vsurpe immediately.

Powres the poyson in his eares.

  Ham. He poysons him i'th' Garden for's estate: His
name's Gonzago: the Story is extant and writ in choyce
Italian. You shall see anon how the Murtherer gets the
loue of Gonzago's wife

   Ophe. The King rises

   Ham. What, frighted with false fire

   Qu. How fares my Lord?
  Pol. Giue o're the Play

   King. Giue me some Light. Away

   All. Lights, Lights, Lights.

Exeunt.

Manet Hamlet & Horatio.

  Ham. Why let the strucken Deere go weepe,
The Hart vngalled play:
For some must watch, while some must sleepe;
So runnes the world away.
Would not this Sir, and a Forrest of Feathers, if the rest of
my Fortunes turne Turke with me; with two Prouinciall
Roses on my rac'd Shooes, get me a Fellowship in a crie
of Players sir

   Hor. Halfe a share

   Ham. A whole one I,
For thou dost know: Oh Damon deere,
This Realme dismantled was of Ioue himselfe,
And now reignes heere.
A verie verie Paiocke

   Hora. You might haue Rim'd

   Ham. Oh good Horatio, Ile take the Ghosts word for
a thousand pound. Did'st perceiue?
  Hora. Verie well my Lord

   Ham. Vpon the talke of the poysoning?
  Hora. I did verie well note him.
Enter Rosincrance and Guildensterne.

  Ham. Oh, ha? Come some Musick. Come y Recorders:
For if the King like not the Comedie,
Why then belike he likes it not perdie.
Come some Musicke

   Guild. Good my Lord, vouchsafe me a word with you

   Ham. Sir, a whole History

   Guild. The King, sir

   Ham. I sir, what of him?
  Guild. Is in his retyrement, maruellous distemper'd

   Ham. With drinke Sir?
  Guild. No my Lord, rather with choller

   Ham. Your wisedome should shew it selfe more richer,
to signifie this to his Doctor: for for me to put him
to his Purgation, would perhaps plundge him into farre
more Choller

   Guild. Good my Lord put your discourse into some
frame, and start not so wildely from my affayre

   Ham. I am tame Sir, pronounce

   Guild. The Queene your Mother, in most great affliction
of spirit, hath sent me to you

   Ham. You are welcome

   Guild. Nay, good my Lord, this courtesie is not of
the right breed. If it shall please you to make me a wholsome
answer, I will doe your Mothers command'ment:
if not, your pardon, and my returne shall bee the end of
my Businesse

   Ham. Sir, I cannot

   Guild. What, my Lord?
  Ham. Make you a wholsome answere: my wits diseas'd.
But sir, such answers as I can make, you shal command:
or rather you say, my Mother: therfore no more
but to the matter. My Mother you say

   Rosin. Then thus she sayes: your behauior hath stroke
her into amazement, and admiration

   Ham. Oh wonderfull Sonne, that can so astonish a
Mother. But is there no sequell at the heeles of this Mothers
admiration?
  Rosin. She desires to speake with you in her Closset,
ere you go to bed

   Ham. We shall obey, were she ten times our Mother.
Haue you any further Trade with vs?
  Rosin. My Lord, you once did loue me

   Ham. So I do still, by these pickers and stealers

   Rosin. Good my Lord, what is your cause of distemper?
You do freely barre the doore of your owne Libertie,
if you deny your greefes to your Friend

   Ham. Sir I lacke Aduancement

   Rosin. How can that be, when you haue the voyce of
the King himselfe, for your Succession in Denmarke?
  Ham. I, but while the grasse growes, the Prouerbe is
something musty.
Enter one with a Recorder.

O the Recorder. Let me see, to withdraw with you, why
do you go about to recouer the winde of mee, as if you
would driue me into a toyle?
  Guild. O my Lord, if my Dutie be too bold, my loue
is too vnmannerly

   Ham. I do not well vnderstand that. Will you play
vpon this Pipe?
  Guild. My Lord, I cannot

   Ham. I pray you

   Guild. Beleeue me, I cannot

   Ham. I do beseech you

   Guild. I know no touch of it, my Lord

   Ham. 'Tis as easie as lying: gouerne these Ventiges
with your finger and thumbe, giue it breath with your
mouth, and it will discourse most excellent Musicke.
Looke you, these are the stoppes

   Guild. But these cannot I command to any vtterance
of hermony, I haue not the skill

   Ham. Why looke you now, how vnworthy a thing
you make of me: you would play vpon mee; you would
seeme to know my stops: you would pluck out the heart
of my Mysterie; you would sound mee from my lowest
Note, to the top of my Compasse: and there is much Musicke,
excellent Voice, in this little Organe, yet cannot
you make it. Why do you thinke, that I am easier to bee
plaid on, then a Pipe? Call me what Instrument you will,
though you can fret me, you cannot play vpon me. God
blesse you Sir.
Enter Polonius.

  Polon. My Lord; the Queene would speak with you,
and presently

   Ham. Do you see that Clowd? that's almost in shape
like a Camell

   Polon. By'th' Masse, and it's like a Camell indeed

   Ham. Me thinkes it is like a Weazell

   Polon. It is back'd like a Weazell

   Ham. Or like a Whale?
  Polon. Verie like a Whale

   Ham. Then will I come to my Mother, by and by:
They foole me to the top of my bent.
I will come by and by

   Polon. I will say so.
Enter.

  Ham. By and by, is easily said. Leaue me Friends:
'Tis now the verie witching time of night,
When Churchyards yawne, and Hell it selfe breaths out
Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot blood,
And do such bitter businesse as the day
Would quake to looke on. Soft now, to my Mother:
Oh Heart, loose not thy Nature; let not euer
The Soule of Nero, enter this firme bosome:
Let me be cruell, not vnnaturall,
I will speake Daggers to her, but vse none:
My Tongue and Soule in this be Hypocrites.
How in my words someuer she be shent,
To giue them Seales, neuer my Soule consent.
Enter King, Rosincrance, and Guildensterne.

  King. I like him not, nor stands it safe with vs,
To let his madnesse range. Therefore prepare you,
I your Commission will forthwith dispatch,
And he to England shall along with you:
The termes of our estate, may not endure
Hazard so dangerous as doth hourely grow
Out of his Lunacies

   Guild. We will our selues prouide:
Most holie and Religious feare it is
To keepe those many many bodies safe
That liue and feede vpon your Maiestie

   Rosin. The single
And peculiar life is bound
With all the strength and Armour of the minde,
To keepe it selfe from noyance: but much more,
That Spirit, vpon whose spirit depends and rests
The liues of many, the cease of Maiestie
Dies not alone; but like a Gulfe doth draw
What's neere it, with it. It is a massie wheele
Fixt on the Somnet of the highest Mount.
To whose huge Spoakes, ten thousand lesser things
Are mortiz'd and adioyn'd: which when it falles,
Each small annexment, pettie consequence
Attends the boystrous Ruine. Neuer alone
Did the King sighe, but with a generall grone

   King. Arme you, I pray you to this speedie Voyage;
For we will Fetters put vpon this feare,
Which now goes too free-footed

   Both. We will haste vs.

Exeunt. Gent.

Enter Polonius.

  Pol. My Lord, he's going to his Mothers Closset:
Behinde the Arras Ile conuey my selfe
To heare the Processe. Ile warrant shee'l tax him home,
And as you said, and wisely was it said,
'Tis meete that some more audience then a Mother,
Since Nature makes them partiall, should o're-heare
The speech of vantage. Fare you well my Liege,
Ile call vpon you ere you go to bed,
And tell you what I know

   King. Thankes deere my Lord.
Oh my offence is ranke, it smels to heauen,
It hath the primall eldest curse vpon't,
A Brothers murther. Pray can I not,
Though inclination be as sharpe as will:
My stronger guilt, defeats my strong intent,
And like a man to double businesse bound,
I stand in pause where I shall first begin,
And both neglect; what if this cursed hand
Were thicker then it selfe with Brothers blood,
Is there not Raine enough in the sweet Heauens
To wash it white as Snow? Whereto serues mercy,
But to confront the visage of Offence?
And what's in Prayer, but this two-fold force,
To be fore-stalled ere we come to fall,
Or pardon'd being downe? Then Ile looke vp,
My fault is past. But oh, what forme of Prayer
Can serue my turne? Forgiue me my foule Murther:
That cannot be, since I am still possest
Of those effects for which I did the Murther.
My Crowne, mine owne Ambition, and my Queene:
May one be pardon'd, and retaine th' offence?
In the corrupted currants of this world,
Offences gilded hand may shoue by Iustice,
And oft 'tis seene, the wicked prize it selfe
Buyes out the Law; but 'tis not so aboue,
There is no shuffling, there the Action lyes
In his true Nature, and we our selues compell'd
Euen to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
To giue in euidence. What then? What rests?
Try what Repentance can. What can it not?
Yet what can it, when one cannot repent?
Oh wretched state! Oh bosome, blacke as death!
Oh limed soule, that strugling to be free,
Art more ingag'd: Helpe Angels, make assay:
Bow stubborne knees, and heart with strings of Steele,
Be soft as sinewes of the new-borne Babe,
All may be well.
Enter Hamlet.

  Ham. Now might I do it pat, now he is praying,
And now Ile doo't, and so he goes to Heauen,
And so am I reueng'd: that would be scann'd,
A Villaine killes my Father, and for that
I his foule Sonne, do this same Villaine send
To heauen. Oh this is hyre and Sallery, not Reuenge.
He tooke my Father grossely, full of bread,
With all his Crimes broad blowne, as fresh as May,
And how his Audit stands, who knowes, saue Heauen:
But in our circumstance and course of thought
'Tis heauie with him: and am I then reueng'd,
To take him in the purging of his Soule,
When he is fit and season'd for his passage? No.
Vp Sword, and know thou a more horrid hent
When he is drunke asleepe: or in his Rage,
Or in th' incestuous pleasure of his bed,
At gaming, swearing, or about some acte
That ha's no rellish of Saluation in't,
Then trip him, that his heeles may kicke at Heauen,
And that his Soule may be as damn'd and blacke
As Hell, whereto it goes. My Mother stayes,
This Physicke but prolongs thy sickly dayes.
Enter.

  King. My words flye vp, my thoughts remain below,
Words without thoughts, neuer to Heauen go.
Enter.

Enter Queene and Polonius.

  Pol. He will come straight:
Looke you lay home to him,
Tell him his prankes haue been too broad to beare with,
And that your Grace hath screen'd, and stoode betweene
Much heate, and him. Ile silence me e'ene heere:
Pray you be round with him

   Ham. within. Mother, mother, mother

   Qu. Ile warrant you, feare me not.
Withdraw, I heare him coming.
Enter Hamlet.

  Ham. Now Mother, what's the matter?
  Qu. Hamlet, thou hast thy Father much offended


   Ham. Mother, you haue my Father much offended

   Qu. Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue

   Ham. Go, go, you question with an idle tongue

   Qu. Why how now Hamlet?
  Ham. Whats the matter now?
  Qu. Haue you forgot me?
  Ham. No by the Rood, not so:
You are the Queene, your Husbands Brothers wife,
But would you were not so. You are my Mother

   Qu. Nay, then Ile set those to you that can speake

   Ham. Come, come, and sit you downe, you shall not
boudge:
You go not till I set you vp a glasse,
Where you may see the inmost part of you?
  Qu. What wilt thou do? thou wilt not murther me?
Helpe, helpe, hoa

   Pol. What hoa, helpe, helpe, helpe

   Ham. How now, a Rat? dead for a Ducate, dead

   Pol. Oh I am slaine.

Killes Polonius

   Qu. Oh me, what hast thou done?
  Ham. Nay I know not, is it the King?
  Qu. Oh what a rash, and bloody deed is this?
  Ham. A bloody deed, almost as bad good Mother,
As kill a King, and marrie with his Brother

   Qu. As kill a King?
  Ham. I Lady, 'twas my word.
Thou wretched, rash, intruding foole farewell,
I tooke thee for thy Betters, take thy Fortune,
Thou find'st to be too busie, is some danger.
Leaue wringing of your hands, peace, sit you downe,
And let me wring your heart, for so I shall
If it be made of penetrable stuffe;
If damned Custome haue not braz'd it so,
That it is proofe and bulwarke against Sense

   Qu. What haue I done, that thou dar'st wag thy tong,
In noise so rude against me?
  Ham. Such an Act
That blurres the grace and blush of Modestie,
Cals Vertue Hypocrite, takes off the Rose
From the faire forehead of an innocent loue,
And makes a blister there. Makes marriage vowes
As false as Dicers Oathes. Oh such a deed,
As from the body of Contraction pluckes
The very soule, and sweete Religion makes
A rapsidie of words. Heauens face doth glow,
Yea this solidity and compound masse,
With tristfull visage as against the doome,
Is thought-sicke at the act

   Qu. Aye me; what act, that roares so lowd, & thunders
in the Index

   Ham. Looke heere vpon this Picture, and on this,
The counterfet presentment of two Brothers:
See what a grace was seated on his Brow,
Hyperions curles, the front of Ioue himselfe,
An eye like Mars, to threaten or command
A Station, like the Herald Mercurie
New lighted on a heauen-kissing hill:
A Combination, and a forme indeed,
Where euery God did seeme to set his Seale,
To giue the world assurance of a man.
This was your Husband. Looke you now what followes.
Heere is your Husband, like a Mildew'd eare
Blasting his wholsom breath. Haue you eyes?
Could you on this faire Mountaine leaue to feed,
And batten on this Moore? Ha? Haue you eyes?
You cannot call it Loue: For at your age,
The hey-day in the blood is tame, it's humble,
And waites vpon the Iudgement: and what Iudgement
Would step from this, to this? What diuell was't,
That thus hath cousend you at hoodman-blinde?
O Shame! where is thy Blush? Rebellious Hell,
If thou canst mutine in a Matrons bones,
To flaming youth, let Vertue be as waxe.
And melt in her owne fire. Proclaime no shame,
When the compulsiue Ardure giues the charge,
Since Frost it selfe, as actiuely doth burne,
As Reason panders Will

   Qu. O Hamlet, speake no more.
Thou turn'st mine eyes into my very soule,
And there I see such blacke and grained spots,
As will not leaue their Tinct

   Ham. Nay, but to liue
In the ranke sweat of an enseamed bed,
Stew'd in Corruption; honying and making loue
Ouer the nasty Stye

   Qu. Oh speake to me, no more,
These words like Daggers enter in mine eares.
No more sweet Hamlet

   Ham. A Murderer, and a Villaine:
A Slaue, that is not twentieth part the tythe
Of your precedent Lord. A vice of Kings,
A Cutpurse of the Empire and the Rule.
That from a shelfe, the precious Diadem stole,
And put it in his Pocket

   Qu. No more.
Enter Ghost.

  Ham. A King of shreds and patches.
Saue me; and houer o're me with your wings
You heauenly Guards. What would your gracious figure?
  Qu. Alas he's mad

   Ham. Do you not come your tardy Sonne to chide,
That laps't in Time and Passion, lets go by
Th' important acting of your dread command? Oh say

   Ghost. Do not forget: this Visitation
Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
But looke, Amazement on thy Mother sits;
O step betweene her, and her fighting Soule,
Conceit in weakest bodies, strongest workes.
Speake to her Hamlet

   Ham. How is it with you Lady?
  Qu. Alas, how is't with you?
That you bend your eye on vacancie,
And with their corporall ayre do hold discourse.
Forth at your eyes, your spirits wildely peepe,
And as the sleeping Soldiours in th' Alarme,
Your bedded haire, like life in excrements,
Start vp, and stand an end. Oh gentle Sonne,
Vpon the heate and flame of thy distemper
Sprinkle coole patience. Whereon do you looke?
  Ham. On him, on him: look you how pale he glares,
His forme and cause conioyn'd, preaching to stones,
Would make them capeable. Do not looke vpon me,
Least with this pitteous action you conuert
My sterne effects: then what I haue to do,
Will want true colour; teares perchance for blood

   Qu. To who do you speake this?
  Ham. Do you see nothing there?
  Qu. Nothing at all, yet all that is I see

   Ham. Nor did you nothing heare?
  Qu. No, nothing but our selues

   Ham. Why look you there: looke how it steals away:
My Father in his habite, as he liued,
Looke where he goes euen now out at the Portall.
Enter.

  Qu. This is the very coynage of your Braine,
This bodilesse Creation extasie is very cunning in

   Ham. Extasie?
My Pulse as yours doth temperately keepe time,
And makes as healthfull Musicke. It is not madnesse
That I haue vttered; bring me to the Test
And I the matter will re-word: which madnesse
Would gamboll from. Mother, for loue of Grace,
Lay not a flattering Vnction to your soule,
That not your trespasse, but my madnesse speakes:
It will but skin and filme the Vlcerous place,
Whil'st ranke Corruption mining all within,
Infects vnseene. Confesse your selfe to Heauen,
Repent what's past, auoyd what is to come,
And do not spred the Compost on the Weedes,
To make them ranke. Forgiue me this my Vertue,
For in the fatnesse of this pursie times,
Vertue it selfe, of Vice must pardon begge,
Yea courb, and woe, for leaue to do him good

   Qu. Oh Hamlet,
Thou hast cleft my heart in twaine

   Ham. O throw away the worser part of it,
And liue the purer with the other halfe.
Good night, but go not to mine Vnkles bed,
Assume a Vertue, if you haue it not, refraine to night,
And that shall lend a kinde of easinesse
To the next abstinence. Once more goodnight,
And when you are desirous to be blest,
Ile blessing begge of you. For this same Lord,
I do repent: but heauen hath pleas'd it so,
To punish me with this, and this with me,
That I must be their Scourge and Minister.
I will bestow him, and will answer well
The death I gaue him: so againe, good night.
I must be cruell, onely to be kinde;
Thus bad begins and worse remaines behinde

   Qu. What shall I do?
  Ham. Not this by no meanes that I bid you do:
Let the blunt King tempt you againe to bed,
Pinch Wanton on your cheeke, call you his Mouse,
And let him for a paire of reechie kisses,
Or padling in your necke with his damn'd Fingers,
Make you to rauell all this matter out,
That I essentially am not in madnesse,
But made in craft. 'Twere good you let him know,
For who that's but a Queene, faire, sober, wise,
Would from a Paddocke, from a Bat, a Gibbe,
Such deere concernings hide, Who would do so,
No in despight of Sense and Secrecie,
Vnpegge the Basket on the houses top:
Let the Birds flye, and like the famous Ape
To try Conclusions in the Basket, creepe
And breake your owne necke downe

   Qu. Be thou assur'd, if words be made of breath,
And breath of life: I haue no life to breath
What thou hast saide to me

   Ham. I must to England, you know that?
  Qu. Alacke I had forgot: 'Tis so concluded on

   Ham. This man shall set me packing:
Ile lugge the Guts into the Neighbor roome,
Mother goodnight. Indeede this Counsellor
Is now most still, most secret, and most graue,
Who was in life, a foolish prating Knaue.
Come sir, to draw toward an end with you.
Good night Mother.
Exit Hamlet tugging in Polonius.

Enter King.

  King. There's matters in these sighes.
These profound heaues
You must translate; Tis fit we vnderstand them.
Where is your Sonne?
  Qu. Ah my good Lord, what haue I seene to night?
  King. What Gertrude? How do's Hamlet?
  Qu. Mad as the Seas, and winde, when both contend
Which is the Mightier, in his lawlesse fit
Behinde the Arras, hearing something stirre,
He whips his Rapier out, and cries a Rat, a Rat,
And in his brainish apprehension killes
The vnseene good old man

   King. Oh heauy deed:
It had bin so with vs had we beene there:
His Liberty is full of threats to all,
To you your selfe, to vs, to euery one.
Alas, how shall this bloody deede be answered?
It will be laide to vs, whose prouidence
Should haue kept short, restrain'd, and out of haunt,
This mad yong man. But so much was our loue,
We would not vnderstand what was most fit,
But like the Owner of a foule disease,
To keepe it from divulging, let's it feede
Euen on the pith of life. Where is he gone?
  Qu. To draw apart the body he hath kild,
O're whom his very madnesse like some Oare
Among a Minerall of Mettels base
Shewes it selfe pure. He weepes for what is done

   King. Oh Gertrude, come away:
The Sun no sooner shall the Mountaines touch,
But we will ship him hence, and this vilde deed,
We must with all our Maiesty and Skill
Both countenance, and excuse.
Enter Ros. & Guild.

Ho Guildenstern:
Friends both go ioyne you with some further ayde:
Hamlet in madnesse hath Polonius slaine,
And from his Mother Clossets hath he drag'd him.
Go seeke him out, speake faire, and bring the body
Into the Chappell. I pray you hast in this.
Exit Gent.

Come Gertrude, wee'l call vp our wisest friends,
To let them know both what we meane to do,
And what's vntimely done. Oh come away,
My soule is full of discord and dismay.

Exeunt.

Enter Hamlet.

  Ham. Safely stowed

   Gentlemen within. Hamlet, Lord Hamlet

   Ham. What noise? Who cals on Hamlet?
Oh heere they come.
Enter Ros. and Guildensterne.

  Ro. What haue you done my Lord with the dead body?
  Ham. Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis Kinne

   Rosin. Tell vs where 'tis, that we may take it thence,
And beare it to the Chappell

   Ham. Do not beleeue it

   Rosin. Beleeue what?
  Ham. That I can keepe your counsell, and not mine
owne. Besides, to be demanded of a Spundge, what replication
should be made by the Sonne of a King

   Rosin. Take you me for a Spundge, my Lord?
  Ham. I sir, that sokes vp the Kings Countenance, his
Rewards, his Authorities (but such Officers do the King
best seruice in the end. He keepes them like an Ape in
the corner of his iaw, first mouth'd to be last swallowed,
when he needes what you haue glean'd, it is but squeezing
you, and Spundge you shall be dry againe

   Rosin. I vnderstand you not my Lord

   Ham. I am glad of it: a knauish speech sleepes in a
foolish eare

   Rosin. My Lord, you must tell vs where the body is,
and go with vs to the King

   Ham. The body is with the King, but the King is not
with the body. The King, is a thing-
  Guild. A thing my Lord?
  Ham. Of nothing: bring me to him, hide Fox, and all
after.

Exeunt.

Enter King.

  King. I haue sent to seeke him, and to find the bodie:
How dangerous is it that this man goes loose:
Yet must not we put the strong Law on him:
Hee's loued of the distracted multitude,
Who like not in their iudgement, but their eyes:
And where 'tis so, th' Offenders scourge is weigh'd
But neerer the offence: to beare all smooth, and euen,
This sodaine sending him away, must seeme
Deliberate pause, diseases desperate growne,
By desperate appliance are releeued,
Or not at all.
Enter Rosincrane.

How now? What hath befalne?
  Rosin. Where the dead body is bestow'd my Lord,
We cannot get from him

   King. But where is he?
  Rosin. Without my Lord, guarded to know your
pleasure

   King. Bring him before vs

   Rosin. Hoa, Guildensterne? Bring in my Lord.
Enter Hamlet and Guildensterne.

  King. Now Hamlet, where's Polonius?
  Ham. At Supper

   King. At Supper? Where?
  Ham. Not where he eats, but where he is eaten, a certaine
conuocation of wormes are e'ne at him. Your worm
is your onely Emperor for diet. We fat all creatures else
to fat vs, and we fat our selfe for Magots. Your fat King,
and your leane Begger is but variable seruice to dishes,
but to one Table that's the end

   King. What dost thou meane by this?
  Ham. Nothing but to shew you how a King may go
a Progresse through the guts of a Begger

   King. Where is Polonius

   Ham. In heauen, send thither to see. If your Messenger
finde him not there, seeke him i'th other place your
selfe: but indeed, if you finde him not this moneth, you
shall nose him as you go vp the staires into the Lobby

   King. Go seeke him there

   Ham. He will stay till ye come

   K. Hamlet, this deed of thine, for thine especial safety
Which we do tender, as we deerely greeue
For that which thou hast done, must send thee hence
With fierie Quicknesse. Therefore prepare thy selfe,
The Barke is readie, and the winde at helpe,
Th' Associates tend, and euery thing at bent
For England

   Ham. For England?
  King. I Hamlet

   Ham. Good

   King. So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes

   Ham. I see a Cherube that see's him: but come, for
England. Farewell deere Mother

   King. Thy louing Father Hamlet

   Hamlet. My Mother: Father and Mother is man and
wife: man & wife is one flesh, and so my mother. Come,
for England.

Exit

  King. Follow him at foote,
Tempt him with speed aboord:
Delay it not, Ile haue him hence to night.
Away, for euery thing is Seal'd and done
That else leanes on th' Affaire, pray you make hast.
And England, if my loue thou holdst at ought,
As my great power thereof may giue thee sense,
Since yet thy Cicatrice lookes raw and red
After the Danish Sword, and thy free awe
Payes homage to vs; thou maist not coldly set
Our Soueraigne Processe, which imports at full
By Letters coniuring to that effect
The present death of Hamlet. Do it England,
For like the Hecticke in my blood he rages,
And thou must cure me: Till I know 'tis done,
How ere my happes, my ioyes were ne're begun.

Exit

Enter Fortinbras with an Armie.

  For. Go Captaine, from me greet the Danish King,
Tell him that by his license, Fortinbras
Claimes the conueyance of a promis'd March
Ouer his Kingdome. You know the Rendeuous:
If that his Maiesty would ought with vs,
We shall expresse our dutie in his eye,
And let him know so

   Cap. I will doo't, my Lord

   For. Go safely on.
Enter.

Enter Queene and Horatio.

  Qu. I will not speake with her

   Hor. She is importunate, indeed distract, her moode
will needs be pittied

   Qu. What would she haue?
  Hor. She speakes much of her Father; saies she heares
There's trickes i'th' world, and hems, and beats her heart,
Spurnes enuiously at Strawes, speakes things in doubt,
That carry but halfe sense: Her speech is nothing,
Yet the vnshaped vse of it doth moue
The hearers to Collection; they ayme at it,
And botch the words vp fit to their owne thoughts,
Which as her winkes, and nods, and gestures yeeld them,
Indeed would make one thinke there would be thought,
Though nothing sure, yet much vnhappily

   Qu. 'Twere good she were spoken with,
For she may strew dangerous coniectures
In ill breeding minds. Let her come in.
To my sicke soule (as sinnes true Nature is)
Each toy seemes Prologue, to some great amisse,
So full of Artlesse iealousie is guilt,
It spill's it selfe, in fearing to be spilt.
Enter Ophelia distracted.

  Ophe. Where is the beauteous Maiesty of Denmark

   Qu. How now Ophelia?
  Ophe. How should I your true loue know from another one?
By his Cockle hat and staffe, and his Sandal shoone

   Qu. Alas sweet Lady: what imports this Song?
  Ophe. Say you? Nay pray you marke.
He is dead and gone Lady, he is dead and gone,
At his head a grasse-greene Turfe, at his heeles a stone.
Enter King.

  Qu. Nay but Ophelia

   Ophe. Pray you marke.
White his Shrow'd as the Mountaine Snow

   Qu. Alas, looke heere my Lord

   Ophe. Larded with sweet Flowers:
Which bewept to the graue did not go,
With true-loue showres

   King. How do ye, pretty Lady?
  Ophe. Well, God dil'd you. They say the Owle was
a Bakers daughter. Lord, wee know what we are, but
know not what we may be. God be at your Table

   King. Conceit vpon her Father

   Ophe. Pray you let's haue no words of this: but when
they aske you what it meanes, say you this:
To morrow is S[aint]. Valentines day, all in the morning betime,
And I a Maid at your Window, to be your Valentine.
Then vp he rose, & don'd his clothes, & dupt the chamber dore,
Let in the Maid, that out a Maid, neuer departed more

   King. Pretty Ophelia

   Ophe. Indeed la? without an oath Ile make an end ont.
By gis, and by S[aint]. Charity,
Alacke, and fie for shame:
Yong men wil doo't, if they come too't,
By Cocke they are too blame.
Quoth she before you tumbled me,
You promis'd me to Wed:
So would I ha done by yonder Sunne,
And thou hadst not come to my bed

   King. How long hath she bin thus?
  Ophe. I hope all will be well. We must bee patient,
but I cannot choose but weepe, to thinke they should
lay him i'th' cold ground: My brother shall knowe of it,
and so I thanke you for your good counsell. Come, my
Coach: Goodnight Ladies: Goodnight sweet Ladies:
Goodnight, goodnight.
Enter.

  King. Follow her close,
Giue her good watch I pray you:
Oh this is the poyson of deepe greefe, it springs
All from her Fathers death. Oh Gertrude, Gertrude,
When sorrowes comes, they come not single spies,
But in Battalians. First, her Father slaine,
Next your Sonne gone, and he most violent Author
Of his owne iust remoue: the people muddied,
Thicke and vnwholsome in their thoughts, and whispers
For good Polonius death; and we haue done but greenly
In hugger mugger to interre him. Poore Ophelia
Diuided from her selfe, and her faire Iudgement,
Without the which we are Pictures, or meere Beasts.
Last, and as much containing as all these,
Her Brother is in secret come from France,
Keepes on his wonder, keepes himselfe in clouds,
And wants not Buzzers to infect his eare
With pestilent Speeches of his Fathers death,
Where in necessitie of matter Beggard,
Will nothing sticke our persons to Arraigne
In eare and eare. O my deere Gertrude, this,
Like to a murdering Peece in many places,
Giues me superfluous death.

A Noise within.

Enter a Messenger.

  Qu. Alacke, what noyse is this?
  King. Where are my Switzers?
Let them guard the doore. What is the matter?
  Mes. Saue your selfe, my Lord.
The Ocean (ouer-peering of his List)
Eates not the Flats with more impittious haste
Then young Laertes, in a Riotous head,
Ore-beares your Officers, the rabble call him Lord,
And as the world were now but to begin,
Antiquity forgot, Custome not knowne,
The Ratifiers and props of euery word,
They cry choose we? Laertes shall be King,
Caps, hands, and tongues, applaud it to the clouds,
Laertes shall be King, Laertes King

   Qu. How cheerefully on the false Traile they cry,
Oh this is Counter you false Danish Dogges.

Noise within. Enter Laertes.

  King. The doores are broke

   Laer. Where is the King, sirs? Stand you all without

   All. No, let's come in

   Laer. I pray you giue me leaue

   Al. We will, we will

   Laer. I thanke you: Keepe the doore.
Oh thou vilde King, giue me my Father

   Qu. Calmely good Laertes

   Laer. That drop of blood, that calmes
Proclaimes me Bastard:
Cries Cuckold to my Father, brands the Harlot
Euen heere betweene the chaste vnsmirched brow
Of my true Mother

   King. What is the cause Laertes,
That thy Rebellion lookes so Gyant-like?
Let him go Gertrude: Do not feare our person:
There's such Diuinity doth hedge a King,
That Treason can but peepe to what it would,
Acts little of his will. Tell me Laertes,
Why thou art thus Incenst? Let him go Gertrude.
Speake man

   Laer. Where's my Father?
  King. Dead

   Qu. But not by him

   King. Let him demand his fill

   Laer. How came he dead? Ile not be Iuggel'd with.
To hell Allegeance: Vowes, to the blackest diuell.
Conscience and Grace, to the profoundest Pit.
I dare Damnation: to this point I stand,
That both the worlds I giue to negligence,
Let come what comes: onely Ile be reueng'd
Most throughly for my Father

   King. Who shall stay you?
  Laer. My Will, not all the world,
And for my meanes, Ile husband them so well,
They shall go farre with little

   King. Good Laertes:
If you desire to know the certaintie
Of your deere Fathers death, if writ in your reuenge,
That Soop-stake you will draw both Friend and Foe,
Winner and Looser

   Laer. None but his Enemies

   King. Will you know them then

   La. To his good Friends, thus wide Ile ope my Armes:
And like the kinde Life-rend'ring Politician,
Repast them with my blood

   King. Why now you speake
Like a good Childe, and a true Gentleman.
That I am guiltlesse of your Fathers death,
And am most sensible in greefe for it,
It shall as leuell to your Iudgement pierce
As day do's to your eye.

A noise within. Let her come in.

Enter Ophelia.

  Laer. How now? what noise is that?
Oh heate drie vp my Braines, teares seuen times salt,
Burne out the Sence and Vertue of mine eye.
By Heauen, thy madnesse shall be payed by waight,
Till our Scale turnes the beame. Oh Rose of May,
Deere Maid, kinde Sister, sweet Ophelia:
Oh Heauens, is't possible, a yong Maids wits,
Should be as mortall as an old mans life?
Nature is fine in Loue, and where 'tis fine,
It sends some precious instance of it selfe
After the thing it loues

   Ophe. They bore him bare fac'd on the Beer,
Hey non nony, nony, hey nony:
And on his graue raines many a teare,
Fare you well my Doue

   Laer. Had'st thou thy wits, and did'st perswade Reuenge,
it could not moue thus

   Ophe. You must sing downe a-downe, and you call
him a-downe-a. Oh, how the wheele becomes it? It is
the false Steward that stole his masters daughter

   Laer. This nothings more then matter

   Ophe. There's Rosemary, that's for Remembraunce.
Pray loue remember: and there is Paconcies, that's for
Thoughts

   Laer. A document in madnesse, thoughts & remembrance
fitted

   Ophe. There's Fennell for you, and Columbines: ther's
Rew for you, and heere's some for me. Wee may call it
Herbe-Grace a Sundaies: Oh you must weare your Rew
with a difference. There's a Daysie, I would giue you
some Violets, but they wither'd all when my Father dyed:
They say, he made a good end;
For bonny sweet Robin is all my ioy

   Laer. Thought, and Affliction, Passion, Hell it selfe:
She turnes to Fauour, and to prettinesse

   Ophe. And will he not come againe,
And will he not come againe:
No, no, he is dead, go to thy Death-bed,
He neuer wil come againe.
His Beard as white as Snow,
All Flaxen was his Pole:
He is gone, he is gone, and we cast away mone,
Gramercy on his Soule.
And of all Christian Soules, I pray God.
God buy ye.

Exeunt. Ophelia

  Laer. Do you see this, you Gods?
  King. Laertes, I must common with your greefe,
Or you deny me right: go but apart,
Make choice of whom your wisest Friends you will,
And they shall heare and iudge 'twixt you and me;
If by direct or by Colaterall hand
They finde vs touch'd, we will our Kingdome giue,
Our Crowne, our Life, and all that we call Ours
To you in satisfaction. But if not,
Be you content to lend your patience to vs,
And we shall ioyntly labour with your soule
To giue it due content

   Laer. Let this be so:
His meanes of death, his obscure buriall;
No Trophee, Sword, nor Hatchment o're his bones,
No Noble rite, nor formall ostentation,
Cry to be heard, as 'twere from Heauen to Earth,
That I must call in question

   King. So you shall:
And where th' offence is, let the great Axe fall.
I pray you go with me.

Exeunt.

Enter Horatio, with an Attendant.

  Hora. What are they that would speake with me?
  Ser. Saylors sir, they say they haue Letters for you

   Hor. Let them come in,
I do not know from what part of the world
I should be greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.
Enter Saylor.

  Say. God blesse you Sir

   Hor. Let him blesse thee too

   Say. Hee shall Sir, and't please him. There's a Letter
for you Sir: It comes from th' Ambassadours that was
bound for England, if your name be Horatio, as I am let
to know it is.

Reads the Letter.

Horatio, When thou shalt haue ouerlook'd this, giue these
Fellowes some meanes to the King: They haue Letters
for him. Ere we were two dayes old at Sea, a Pyrate of very
Warlicke appointment gaue vs Chace. Finding our selues too
slow of Saile, we put on a compelled Valour. In the Grapple, I
boorded them: On the instant they got cleare of our Shippe, so
I alone became their Prisoner. They haue dealt with mee, like
Theeues of Mercy, but they knew what they did. I am to doe
a good turne for them. Let the King haue the Letters I haue
sent, and repaire thou to me with as much hast as thou wouldest
flye death. I haue words to speake in your eare, will make thee
dumbe, yet are they much too light for the bore of the Matter.
These good Fellowes will bring thee where I am. Rosincrance
and Guildensterne, hold their course for England. Of them
I haue much to tell thee, Farewell.
He that thou knowest thine,
Hamlet.
Come, I will giue you way for these your Letters,
And do't the speedier, that you may direct me
To him from whom you brought them.
Enter.

Enter King and Laertes.

  King. Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,
And you must put me in your heart for Friend,
Sith you haue heard, and with a knowing eare,
That he which hath your Noble Father slaine,
Pursued my life

   Laer. It well appeares. But tell me,
Why you proceeded not against these feates,
So crimefull, and so Capitall in Nature,
As by your Safety, Wisedome, all things else,
You mainly were stirr'd vp?
  King. O for two speciall Reasons,
Which may to you (perhaps) seeme much vnsinnowed,
And yet to me they are strong. The Queen his Mother,
Liues almost by his lookes: and for my selfe,
My Vertue or my Plague, be it either which,
She's so coniunctiue to my life, and soule;
That as the Starre moues not but in his Sphere,
I could not but by her. The other Motiue,
Why to a publike count I might not go,
Is the great loue the generall gender beare him,
Who dipping all his Faults in their affection,
Would like the Spring that turneth Wood to Stone,
Conuert his Gyues to Graces. So that my Arrowes
Too slightly timbred for so loud a Winde,
Would haue reuerted to my Bow againe,
And not where I had arm'd them

   Laer. And so haue I a Noble Father lost,
A Sister driuen into desperate tearmes,
Who was (if praises may go backe againe)
Stood Challenger on mount of all the Age
For her perfections. But my reuenge will come

   King. Breake not your sleepes for that,
You must not thinke
That we are made of stuffe, so flat, and dull,
That we can let our Beard be shooke with danger,
And thinke it pastime. You shortly shall heare more,
I lou'd your Father, and we loue our Selfe,
And that I hope will teach you to imagine-
Enter a Messenger.

How now? What Newes?
  Mes. Letters my Lord from Hamlet, This to your
Maiesty: this to the Queene

   King. From Hamlet? Who brought them?
  Mes. Saylors my Lord they say, I saw them not:
They were giuen me by Claudio, he receiu'd them

   King. Laertes you shall heare them:
Leaue vs.

Exit Messenger

High and Mighty, you shall know I am set naked on your
Kingdome. To morrow shall I begge leaue to see your Kingly
Eyes. When I shall (first asking your Pardon thereunto) recount
th' Occasions of my sodaine, and more strange returne.
Hamlet.
What should this meane? Are all the rest come backe?
Or is it some abuse? Or no such thing?
  Laer. Know you the hand?
  Kin. 'Tis Hamlets Character, naked and in a Postscript
here he sayes alone: Can you aduise me?
  Laer. I'm lost in it my Lord; but let him come,
It warmes the very sicknesse in my heart,
That I shall liue and tell him to his teeth;
Thus diddest thou

   Kin. If it be so Laertes, as how should it be so:
How otherwise will you be rul'd by me?
  Laer. If so you'l not o'rerule me to a peace

   Kin. To thine owne peace: if he be now return'd,
As checking at his Voyage, and that he meanes
No more to vndertake it; I will worke him
To an exployt now ripe in my Deuice,
Vnder the which he shall not choose but fall;
And for his death no winde of blame shall breath,
But euen his Mother shall vncharge the practice,
And call it accident: Some two Monthes hence
Here was a Gentleman of Normandy,
I'ue seene my selfe, and seru'd against the French,
And they ran well on Horsebacke; but this Gallant
Had witchcraft in't; he grew into his Seat,
And to such wondrous doing brought his Horse,
As had he beene encorps't and demy-Natur'd
With the braue Beast, so farre he past my thought,
That I in forgery of shapes and trickes,
Come short of what he did

   Laer. A Norman was't?
  Kin. A Norman

   Laer. Vpon my life Lamound

   Kin. The very same

   Laer. I know him well, he is the Brooch indeed,
And Iemme of all our Nation

   Kin. Hee mad confession of you,
And gaue you such a Masterly report,
For Art and exercise in your defence;
And for your Rapier most especiall,
That he cryed out, t'would be a sight indeed,
If one could match you Sir. This report of his
Did Hamlet so envenom with his Enuy,
That he could nothing doe but wish and begge,
Your sodaine comming ore to play with him;
Now out of this

   Laer. Why out of this, my Lord?
  Kin. Laertes was your Father deare to you?
Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,
A face without a heart?
  Laer. Why aske you this?
  Kin. Not that I thinke you did not loue your Father,
But that I know Loue is begun by Time:
And that I see in passages of proofe,
Time qualifies the sparke and fire of it:
Hamlet comes backe: what would you vndertake,
To show your selfe your Fathers sonne indeed,
More then in words?
  Laer. To cut his throat i'th' Church

   Kin. No place indeed should murder Sancturize;
Reuenge should haue no bounds: but good Laertes
Will you doe this, keepe close within your Chamber,
Hamlet return'd, shall know you are come home:
Wee'l put on those shall praise your excellence,
And set a double varnish on the fame
The Frenchman gaue you, bring you in fine together,
And wager on your heads, he being remisse,
Most generous, and free from all contriuing,
Will not peruse the Foiles? So that with ease,
Or with a little shuffling, you may choose
A Sword vnbaited, and in a passe of practice,
Requit him for your Father

   Laer. I will doo't.
And for that purpose Ile annoint my Sword:
I bought an Vnction of a Mountebanke
So mortall, I but dipt a knife in it,
Where it drawes blood, no Cataplasme so rare,
Collected from all Simples that haue Vertue
Vnder the Moone, can saue the thing from death,
That is but scratcht withall: Ile touch my point,
With this contagion, that if I gall him slightly,
It may be death

   Kin. Let's further thinke of this,
Weigh what conuenience both of time and meanes
May fit vs to our shape, if this should faile;
And that our drift looke through our bad performance,
'Twere better not assaid; therefore this Proiect
Should haue a backe or second, that might hold,
If this should blast in proofe: Soft, let me see
Wee'l make a solemne wager on your commings,
I ha't: when in your motion you are hot and dry,
As make your bowts more violent to the end,
And that he cals for drinke; Ile haue prepar'd him
A Challice for the nonce; whereon but sipping,
If he by chance escape your venom'd stuck,
Our purpose may hold there; how sweet Queene.
Enter Queene.

  Queen. One woe doth tread vpon anothers heele,
So fast they'l follow: your Sister's drown'd Laertes

   Laer. Drown'd! O where?
  Queen. There is a Willow growes aslant a Brooke,
That shewes his hore leaues in the glassie streame:
There with fantasticke Garlands did she come,
Of Crow-flowers, Nettles, Daysies, and long Purples,
That liberall Shepheards giue a grosser name;
But our cold Maids doe Dead Mens Fingers call them:
There on the pendant boughes, her Coronet weeds
Clambring to hang; an enuious sliuer broke,
When downe the weedy Trophies, and her selfe,
Fell in the weeping Brooke, her cloathes spred wide,
And Mermaid-like, a while they bore her vp,
Which time she chaunted snatches of old tunes,
As one incapable of her owne distresse,
Or like a creature Natiue, and indued
Vnto that Element: but long it could not be,
Till that her garments, heauy with her drinke,
Pul'd the poore wretch from her melodious buy,
To muddy death

   Laer. Alas then, is she drown'd?
  Queen. Drown'd, drown'd

   Laer. Too much of water hast thou poore Ophelia,
And therefore I forbid my teares: but yet
It is our tricke, Nature her custome holds,
Let shame say what it will; when these are gone
The woman will be out: Adue my Lord,
I haue a speech of fire, that faine would blaze,
But that this folly doubts it.
Enter.

  Kin. Let's follow, Gertrude:
How much I had to doe to calme his rage?
Now feare I this will giue it start againe;
Therefore let's follow.

Exeunt.

Enter two Clownes.

  Clown. Is she to bee buried in Christian buriall, that
wilfully seekes her owne saluation?
  Other. I tell thee she is, and therefore make her Graue
straight, the Crowner hath sate on her, and finds it Christian
buriall

   Clo. How can that be, vnlesse she drowned her selfe in
her owne defence?
  Other. Why 'tis found so

   Clo. It must be Se offendendo, it cannot bee else: for
heere lies the point; If I drowne my selfe wittingly, it argues
an Act: and an Act hath three branches. It is an
Act to doe and to performe; argall she drown'd her selfe
wittingly

   Other. Nay but heare you Goodman Deluer

   Clown. Giue me leaue; heere lies the water; good:
heere stands the man; good: If the man goe to this water
and drowne himselfe; it is will he nill he, he goes;
marke you that? But if the water come to him & drowne
him; hee drownes not himselfe. Argall, hee that is not
guilty of his owne death, shortens not his owne life

   Other. But is this law?
  Clo. I marry is't, Crowners Quest Law

   Other. Will you ha the truth on't: if this had not
beene a Gentlewoman, shee should haue beene buried
out of Christian Buriall

   Clo. Why there thou say'st. And the more pitty that
great folke should haue countenance in this world to
drowne or hang themselues, more then their euen Christian.
Come, my Spade; there is no ancient Gentlemen,
but Gardiners, Ditchers and Graue-makers; they hold vp
Adams Profession

   Other. Was he a Gentleman?
  Clo. He was the first that euer bore Armes

   Other. Why he had none

   Clo. What, ar't a Heathen? how doth thou vnderstand
the Scripture? the Scripture sayes Adam dig'd;
could hee digge without Armes? Ile put another question
to thee; if thou answerest me not to the purpose, confesse
thy selfe-
  Other. Go too

   Clo. What is he that builds stronger then either the
Mason, the Shipwright, or the Carpenter?
  Other. The Gallowes maker; for that Frame outliues a
thousand Tenants

   Clo. I like thy wit well in good faith, the Gallowes
does well; but how does it well? it does well to those
that doe ill: now, thou dost ill to say the Gallowes is
built stronger then the Church: Argall, the Gallowes
may doe well to thee. Too't againe, Come

   Other. Who builds stronger then a Mason, a Shipwright,
or a Carpenter?
  Clo. I, tell me that, and vnyoake

   Other. Marry, now I can tell

   Clo. Too't

   Other. Masse, I cannot tell.
Enter Hamlet and Horatio a farre off.

  Clo. Cudgell thy braines no more about it; for your
dull Asse will not mend his pace with beating; and when
you are ask't this question next, say a Graue-maker: the
Houses that he makes, lasts till Doomesday: go, get thee
to Yaughan, fetch me a stoupe of Liquor.

Sings.

In youth when I did loue, did loue,
me thought it was very sweete:
To contract O the time for a my behoue,
O me thought there was nothing meete

   Ham. Ha's this fellow no feeling of his businesse, that
he sings at Graue-making?
  Hor. Custome hath made it in him a property of easinesse

   Ham. 'Tis ee'n so; the hand of little Imployment hath
the daintier sense

   Clowne sings. But Age with his stealing steps
hath caught me in his clutch:
And hath shipped me intill the Land,
as if I had neuer beene such

   Ham. That Scull had a tongue in it, and could sing
once: how the knaue iowles it to th' grownd, as if it
were Caines Iaw-bone, that did the first murther: It
might be the Pate of a Polititian which this Asse o're Offices:
one that could circumuent God, might it not?
  Hor. It might, my Lord

   Ham. Or of a Courtier, which could say, Good Morrow
sweet Lord: how dost thou, good Lord? this
might be my Lord such a one, that prais'd my Lord such
a ones Horse, when he meant to begge it; might it not?
  Hor. I, my Lord

   Ham. Why ee'n so: and now my Lady Wormes,
Chaplesse, and knockt about the Mazard with a Sextons
Spade; heere's fine Reuolution, if wee had the tricke to
see't. Did these bones cost no more the breeding, but
to play at Loggets with 'em? mine ake to thinke
on't

   Clowne sings. A Pickhaxe and a Spade, a Spade,
for and a shrowding-Sheete:
O a Pit of Clay for to be made,
for such a Guest is meete

   Ham. There's another: why might not that bee the
Scull of a Lawyer? where be his Quiddits now? his
Quillets? his Cases? his Tenures, and his Tricks? why
doe's he suffer this rude knaue now to knocke him about
the Sconce with a dirty Shouell, and will not tell him of
his Action of Battery? hum. This fellow might be in's
time a great buyer of Land, with his Statutes, his Recognizances,
his Fines, his double Vouchers, his Recoueries:
Is this the fine of his Fines, and the recouery of his Recoueries,
to haue his fine Pate full of fine Dirt? will his
Vouchers vouch him no more of his Purchases, and double
ones too, then the length and breadth of a paire of
Indentures? the very Conueyances of his Lands will
hardly lye in this Boxe; and must the Inheritor himselfe
haue no more? ha?
  Hor. Not a iot more, my Lord

   Ham. Is not Parchment made of Sheep-skinnes?
  Hor. I my Lord, and of Calue-skinnes too

   Ham. They are Sheepe and Calues that seek out assurance
in that. I will speake to this fellow: whose Graue's
this Sir?
  Clo. Mine Sir:
O a Pit of Clay for to be made,
for such a Guest is meete

   Ham. I thinke it be thine indeed: for thou liest in't

   Clo. You lye out on't Sir, and therefore it is not yours:
for my part, I doe not lye in't; and yet it is mine

   Ham. Thou dost lye in't, to be in't and say 'tis thine:
'tis for the dead, not for the quicke, therefore thou
lyest

   Clo. 'Tis a quicke lye Sir, 'twill away againe from me
to you

   Ham. What man dost thou digge it for?
  Clo. For no man Sir

   Ham. What woman then?
  Clo. For none neither

   Ham. Who is to be buried in't?
  Clo. One that was a woman Sir; but rest her Soule,
shee's dead

   Ham. How absolute the knaue is? wee must speake
by the Carde, or equiuocation will vndoe vs: by the
Lord Horatio, these three yeares I haue taken note of it,
the Age is growne so picked, that the toe of the Pesant
comes so neere the heeles of our Courtier, hee galls his
Kibe. How long hast thou been a Graue-maker?
  Clo. Of all the dayes i'th' yeare, I came too't that day
that our last King Hamlet o'recame Fortinbras

   Ham. How long is that since?
  Clo. Cannot you tell that? euery foole can tell that:
It was the very day, that young Hamlet was borne, hee
that was mad, and sent into England

   Ham. I marry, why was he sent into England?
  Clo. Why, because he was mad; hee shall recouer his
wits there; or if he do not, it's no great matter there

   Ham. Why?
  Clo. 'Twill not be seene in him, there the men are as
mad as he

   Ham. How came he mad?
  Clo. Very strangely they say

   Ham. How strangely?
  Clo. Faith e'ene with loosing his wits

   Ham. Vpon what ground?
  Clo. Why heere in Denmarke: I haue bin sixeteene
heere, man and Boy thirty yeares

   Ham. How long will a man lie i'th' earth ere he rot?
  Clo. Ifaith, if he be not rotten before he die (as we haue
many pocky Coarses now adaies, that will scarce hold
the laying in) he will last you some eight yeare, or nine
yeare. A Tanner will last you nine yeare

   Ham. Why he, more then another?
  Clo. Why sir, his hide is so tan'd with his Trade, that
he will keepe out water a great while. And your water,
is a sore Decayer of your horson dead body. Heres a Scull
now: this Scul, has laine in the earth three & twenty years

   Ham. Whose was it?
  Clo. A whoreson mad Fellowes it was;
Whose doe you thinke it was?
  Ham. Nay, I know not

   Clo. A pestilence on him for a mad Rogue, a pour'd a
Flaggon of Renish on my head once. This same Scull
Sir, this same Scull sir, was Yoricks Scull, the Kings Iester

   Ham. This?
  Clo. E'ene that

   Ham. Let me see. Alas poore Yorick, I knew him Horatio,
a fellow of infinite Iest; of most excellent fancy, he
hath borne me on his backe a thousand times: And how
abhorred my Imagination is, my gorge rises at it. Heere
hung those lipps, that I haue kist I know not how oft.
Where be your Iibes now? Your Gambals? Your
Songs? Your flashes of Merriment that were wont to
set the Table on a Rore? No one now to mock your own
Ieering? Quite chopfalne? Now get you to my Ladies
Chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch thicke, to this
fauour she must come. Make her laugh at that: prythee
Horatio tell me one thing

   Hor. What's that my Lord?
  Ham. Dost thou thinke Alexander lookt o'this fashion
i'th' earth?
  Hor. E'ene so

   Ham. And smelt so? Puh

   Hor. E'ene so, my Lord

   Ham. To what base vses we may returne Horatio.
Why may not Imagination trace the Noble dust of Alexander,
till he find it stopping a bunghole

   Hor. 'Twere to consider: to curiously to consider so

   Ham. No faith, not a iot. But to follow him thether
with modestie enough, & likeliehood to lead it; as thus.
Alexander died: Alexander was buried: Alexander returneth
into dust; the dust is earth; of earth we make
Lome, and why of that Lome (whereto he was conuerted)
might they not stopp a Beere-barrell?
Imperiall Caesar, dead and turn'd to clay,
Might stop a hole to keepe the winde away.
Oh, that that earth, which kept the world in awe,
Should patch a Wall, t' expell the winters flaw.
But soft, but soft, aside; heere comes the King.
Enter King, Queene, Laertes, and a Coffin, with Lords attendant.

The Queene, the Courtiers. Who is that they follow,
And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken,
The Coarse they follow, did with disperate hand,
Fore do it owne life; 'twas some Estate.
Couch we a while, and mark

   Laer. What Cerimony else?
  Ham. That is Laertes, a very Noble youth: Marke

   Laer. What Cerimony else?
  Priest. Her Obsequies haue bin as farre inlarg'd.
As we haue warrantie, her death was doubtfull,
And but that great Command, o're-swaies the order,
She should in ground vnsanctified haue lodg'd,
Till the last Trumpet. For charitable praier,
Shardes, Flints, and Peebles, should be throwne on her:
Yet heere she is allowed her Virgin Rites,
Her Maiden strewments, and the bringing home
Of Bell and Buriall

   Laer. Must there no more be done ?
  Priest. No more be done:
We should prophane the seruice of the dead,
To sing sage Requiem, and such rest to her
As to peace-parted Soules

   Laer. Lay her i'th' earth,
And from her faire and vnpolluted flesh,
May Violets spring. I tell thee (churlish Priest)
A Ministring Angell shall my Sister be,
When thou liest howling?
  Ham. What, the faire Ophelia?
  Queene. Sweets, to the sweet farewell.
I hop'd thou should'st haue bin my Hamlets wife:
I thought thy Bride-bed to haue deckt (sweet Maid)
And not t'haue strew'd thy Graue

   Laer. Oh terrible woer,
Fall ten times trebble, on that cursed head
Whose wicked deed, thy most Ingenious sence
Depriu'd thee of. Hold off the earth a while,
Till I haue caught her once more in mine armes:

Leaps in the graue.

Now pile your dust, vpon the quicke, and dead,
Till of this flat a Mountaine you haue made,
To o're top old Pelion, or the skyish head
Of blew Olympus

   Ham. What is he, whose griefes
Beares such an Emphasis? whose phrase of Sorrow
Coniure the wandring Starres, and makes them stand
Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,
Hamlet the Dane

   Laer. The deuill take thy soule

   Ham. Thou prai'st not well,
I prythee take thy fingers from my throat;
Sir though I am not Spleenatiue, and rash,
Yet haue I something in me dangerous,
Which let thy wisenesse feare. Away thy hand

   King. Pluck them asunder

   Qu. Hamlet, Hamlet

   Gen. Good my Lord be quiet

   Ham. Why I will fight with him vppon this Theme.
Vntill my eielids will no longer wag

   Qu. Oh my Sonne, what Theame?
  Ham. I lou'd Ophelia; fortie thousand Brothers
Could not (with all there quantitie of Loue)
Make vp my summe. What wilt thou do for her?
  King. Oh he is mad Laertes,
  Qu. For loue of God forbeare him

   Ham. Come show me what thou'lt doe.
Woo't weepe? Woo't fight? Woo't teare thy selfe?
Woo't drinke vp Esile, eate a Crocodile?
Ile doo't. Dost thou come heere to whine;
To outface me with leaping in her Graue?
Be buried quicke with her, and so will I.
And if thou prate of Mountaines; let them throw
Millions of Akers on vs; till our ground
Sindging his pate against the burning Zone,
Make Ossa like a wart. Nay, and thou'lt mouth,
Ile rant as well as thou

   Kin. This is meere Madnesse:
And thus awhile the fit will worke on him:
Anon as patient as the female Doue,
When that her Golden Cuplet are disclos'd;
His silence will sit drooping

   Ham. Heare you Sir:
What is the reason that you vse me thus?
I lou'd you euer; but it is no matter:
Let Hercules himselfe doe what he may,
The Cat will Mew, and Dogge will haue his day.
Enter.

  Kin. I pray you good Horatio wait vpon him,
Strengthen your patience in our last nights speech,
Wee'l put the matter to the present push:
Good Gertrude set some watch ouer your Sonne,
This Graue shall haue a liuing Monument:
An houre of quiet shortly shall we see;
Till then, in patience our proceeding be.

Exeunt.

Enter Hamlet and Horatio

   Ham. So much for this Sir; now let me see the other,
You doe remember all the Circumstance

   Hor. Remember it my Lord?
  Ham. Sir, in my heart there was a kinde of fighting,
That would not let me sleepe; me thought I lay
Worse then the mutines in the Bilboes, rashly,
(And praise be rashnesse for it) let vs know,
Our indiscretion sometimes serues vs well,
When our deare plots do paule, and that should teach vs,
There's a Diuinity that shapes our ends,
Rough-hew them how we will

   Hor. That is most certaine

   Ham. Vp from my Cabin
My sea-gowne scarft about me in the darke,
Grop'd I to finde out them; had my desire,
Finger'd their Packet, and in fine, withdrew
To mine owne roome againe, making so bold,
(My feares forgetting manners) to vnseale
Their grand Commission, where I found Horatio,
Oh royall knauery: An exact command,
Larded with many seuerall sorts of reason;
Importing Denmarks health, and Englands too,
With hoo, such Bugges and Goblins in my life,
That on the superuize no leasure bated,
No not to stay the grinding of the Axe,
My head should be struck off

   Hor. Ist possible?
  Ham. Here's the Commission, read it at more leysure:
But wilt thou heare me how I did proceed?
  Hor. I beseech you

   Ham. Being thus benetted round with Villaines,
Ere I could make a Prologue to my braines,
They had begun the Play. I sate me downe,
Deuis'd a new Commission, wrote it faire,
I once did hold it as our Statists doe,
A basenesse to write faire; and laboured much
How to forget that learning: but Sir now,
It did me Yeomans seriuce: wilt thou know
The effects of what I wrote?
  Hor. I, good my Lord

   Ham. An earnest Coniuration from the King,
As England was his faithfull Tributary,
As loue betweene them, as the Palme should flourish,
As Peace should still her wheaten Garland weare,
And stand a Comma 'tweene their amities,
And many such like Assis of great charge,
That on the view and know of these Contents,
Without debatement further, more or lesse,
He should the bearers put to sodaine death,
Not shriuing time allowed

   Hor. How was this seal'd?
  Ham. Why, euen in that was Heauen ordinate;
I had my fathers Signet in my Purse,
Which was the Modell of that Danish Seale:
Folded the Writ vp in forme of the other,
Subscrib'd it, gau't th' impression, plac't it safely,
The changeling neuer knowne: Now, the next day
Was our Sea Fight, and what to this was sement,
Thou know'st already

   Hor. So Guildensterne and Rosincrance, go too't

   Ham. Why man, they did make loue to this imployment
They are not neere my Conscience; their debate
Doth by their owne insinuation grow:
'Tis dangerous, when the baser nature comes
Betweene the passe, and fell incensed points
Of mighty opposites

   Hor. Why, what a King is this?
  Ham. Does it not, thinkst thee, stand me now vpon
He that hath kil'd my King, and whor'd my Mother,
Popt in betweene th' election and my hopes,
Throwne out his Angle for my proper life,
And with such coozenage; is't not perfect conscience,
To quit him with this arme? And is't not to be damn'd
To let this Canker of our nature come
In further euill

   Hor. It must be shortly knowne to him from England
What is the issue of the businesse there

   Ham. It will be short,
The interim's mine, and a mans life's no more
Then to say one: but I am very sorry good Horatio,
That to Laertes I forgot my selfe;
For by the image of my Cause, I see
The Portraiture of his; Ile count his fauours:
But sure the brauery of his griefe did put me
Into a Towring passion

   Hor. Peace, who comes heere?
Enter young Osricke.

  Osr. Your Lordship is right welcome back to Denmarke

   Ham. I humbly thank you Sir, dost know this waterflie?
  Hor. No my good Lord

   Ham. Thy state is the more gracious; for 'tis a vice to
know him: he hath much Land, and fertile; let a Beast
be Lord of Beasts, and his Crib shall stand at the Kings
Messe; 'tis a Chowgh; but as I saw spacious in the possession
of dirt

   Osr. Sweet Lord, if your friendship were at leysure,
I should impart a thing to you from his Maiesty

   Ham. I will receiue it with all diligence of spirit; put
your Bonet to his right vse, 'tis for the head

   Osr. I thanke your Lordship, 'tis very hot

   Ham. No, beleeue mee 'tis very cold, the winde is
Northerly

   Osr. It is indifferent cold my Lord indeed

   Ham. Mee thinkes it is very soultry, and hot for my
Complexion

   Osr. Exceedingly, my Lord, it is very soultry, as 'twere
I cannot tell how: but my Lord, his Maiesty bad me signifie
to you, that he ha's laid a great wager on your head:
Sir, this is the matter

   Ham. I beseech you remember

   Osr. Nay, in good faith, for mine ease in good faith:
Sir, you are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes is at
his weapon

   Ham. What's his weapon?
  Osr. Rapier and dagger

   Ham. That's two of his weapons; but well

   Osr. The sir King ha's wag'd with him six Barbary horses,
against the which he impon'd as I take it, sixe French
Rapiers and Poniards, with their assignes, as Girdle,
Hangers or so: three of the Carriages infaith are very
deare to fancy, very responsiue to the hilts, most delicate
carriages, and of very liberall conceit

   Ham. What call you the Carriages?
  Osr. The Carriages Sir, are the hangers

   Ham. The phrase would bee more Germaine to the
matter: If we could carry Cannon by our sides; I would
it might be Hangers till then; but on sixe Barbary Horses
against sixe French Swords: their Assignes, and three
liberall conceited Carriages, that's the French but against
the Danish; why is this impon'd as you call it?
  Osr. The King Sir, hath laid that in a dozen passes betweene
you and him, hee shall not exceed you three hits;
He hath one twelue for mine, and that would come to
imediate tryall, if your Lordship would vouchsafe the
Answere

   Ham. How if I answere no?
  Osr. I meane my Lord, the opposition of your person
in tryall

   Ham. Sir, I will walke heere in the Hall; if it please
his Maiestie, 'tis the breathing time of day with me; let
the Foyles bee brought, the Gentleman willing, and the
King hold his purpose; I will win for him if I can: if
not, Ile gaine nothing but my shame, and the odde hits

   Osr. Shall I redeliuer you ee'n so?
  Ham. To this effect Sir, after what flourish your nature
will

   Osr. I commend my duty to your Lordship

   Ham. Yours, yours; hee does well to commend it
himselfe, there are no tongues else for's tongue

   Hor. This Lapwing runs away with the shell on his
head

   Ham. He did Complie with his Dugge before hee
suck't it: thus had he and mine more of the same Beauty
that I know the drossie age dotes on; only got the tune of
the time, and outward habite of encounter, a kinde of
yesty collection, which carries them through & through
the most fond and winnowed opinions; and doe but blow
them to their tryalls: the Bubbles are out

   Hor. You will lose this wager, my Lord

   Ham. I doe not thinke so, since he went into France,
I haue beene in continuall practice; I shall winne at the
oddes: but thou wouldest not thinke how all heere about
my heart: but it is no matter

   Hor. Nay, good my Lord

   Ham. It is but foolery; but it is such a kinde of
gain-giuing as would perhaps trouble a woman

   Hor. If your minde dislike any thing, obey. I will forestall
their repaire hither, and say you are not fit

   Ham. Not a whit, we defie Augury; there's a speciall
Prouidence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be now, 'tis not
to come: if it bee not to come, it will bee now: if it
be not now; yet it will come; the readinesse is all, since no
man ha's ought of what he leaues. What is't to leaue betimes?
Enter King, Queene, Laertes and Lords, with other Attendants with
Foyles,
and Gauntlets, a Table and Flagons of Wine on it.

  Kin. Come Hamlet, come, and take this hand from me

   Ham. Giue me your pardon Sir, I'ue done you wrong,
But pardon't as you are a Gentleman.
This presence knowes,
And you must needs haue heard how I am punisht
With sore distraction? What I haue done
That might your nature honour, and exception
Roughly awake, I heere proclaime was madnesse:
Was't Hamlet wrong'd Laertes? Neuer Hamlet.
If Hamlet from himselfe be tane away:
And when he's not himselfe, do's wrong Laertes,
Then Hamlet does it not, Hamlet denies it:
Who does it then? His Madnesse? If't be so,
Hamlet is of the Faction that is wrong'd,
His madnesse is poore Hamlets Enemy.
Sir, in this Audience,
Let my disclaiming from a purpos'd euill,
Free me so farre in your most generous thoughts,
That I haue shot mine Arrow o're the house,
And hurt my Mother

   Laer. I am satisfied in Nature,
Whose motiue in this case should stirre me most
To my Reuenge. But in my termes of Honor
I stand aloofe, and will no reconcilement,
Till by some elder Masters of knowne Honor,
I haue a voyce, and president of peace
To keepe my name vngorg'd. But till that time,
I do receiue your offer'd loue like loue,
And wil not wrong it

   Ham. I do embrace it freely,
And will this Brothers wager frankely play.
Giue vs the Foyles: Come on

   Laer. Come one for me

   Ham. Ile be your foile Laertes, in mine ignorance,
Your Skill shall like a Starre i'th' darkest night,
Sticke fiery off indeede

   Laer. You mocke me Sir

   Ham. No by this hand

   King. Giue them the Foyles yong Osricke,
Cousen Hamlet, you know the wager

   Ham. Verie well my Lord,
Your Grace hath laide the oddes a'th' weaker side

   King. I do not feare it,
I haue seene you both:
But since he is better'd, we haue therefore oddes

   Laer. This is too heauy,
Let me see another

   Ham. This likes me well,
These Foyles haue all a length.

Prepare to play.

  Osricke. I my good Lord

   King. Set me the Stopes of wine vpon that Table:
If Hamlet giue the first, or second hit,
Or quit in answer of the third exchange,
Let all the Battlements their Ordinance fire,
The King shal drinke to Hamlets better breath,
And in the Cup an vnion shal he throw
Richer then that, which foure successiue Kings
In Denmarkes Crowne haue worne.
Giue me the Cups,
And let the Kettle to the Trumpets speake,
The Trumpet to the Cannoneer without,
The Cannons to the Heauens, the Heauen to Earth,
Now the King drinkes to Hamlet. Come, begin,
And you the Iudges beare a wary eye

   Ham. Come on sir

   Laer. Come on sir.

They play.

  Ham. One

   Laer. No

   Ham. Iudgement

   Osr. A hit, a very palpable hit

   Laer. Well: againe

   King. Stay, giue me drinke.
Hamlet, this Pearle is thine,
Here's to thy health. Giue him the cup,

Trumpets sound, and shot goes off.

  Ham. Ile play this bout first, set by a-while.
Come: Another hit; what say you?
  Laer. A touch, a touch, I do confesse

   King. Our Sonne shall win

   Qu. He's fat, and scant of breath.
Heere's a Napkin, rub thy browes,
The Queene Carowses to thy fortune, Hamlet

   Ham. Good Madam

   King. Gertrude, do not drinke

   Qu. I will my Lord;
I pray you pardon me

   King. It is the poyson'd Cup, it is too late

   Ham. I dare not drinke yet Madam,
By and by

   Qu. Come, let me wipe thy face

   Laer. My Lord, Ile hit him now

   King. I do not thinke't

   Laer. And yet 'tis almost 'gainst my conscience

   Ham. Come for the third.
Laertes, you but dally,
I pray you passe with your best violence,
I am affear'd you make a wanton of me

   Laer. Say you so? Come on.

Play.

  Osr. Nothing neither way

   Laer. Haue at you now.

In scuffling they change Rapiers.

  King. Part them, they are incens'd

   Ham. Nay come, againe

   Osr. Looke to the Queene there hoa

   Hor. They bleed on both sides. How is't my Lord?
  Osr. How is't Laertes?
  Laer. Why as a Woodcocke
To mine Sprindge, Osricke,
I am iustly kill'd with mine owne Treacherie

   Ham. How does the Queene?
  King. She sounds to see them bleede

   Qu. No, no, the drinke, the drinke.
Oh my deere Hamlet, the drinke, the drinke,
I am poyson'd

   Ham. Oh Villany! How? Let the doore be lock'd.
Treacherie, seeke it out

   Laer. It is heere Hamlet.
Hamlet, thou art slaine,
No Medicine in the world can do thee good.
In thee, there is not halfe an houre of life;
The Treacherous Instrument is in thy hand,
Vnbated and envenom'd: the foule practise
Hath turn'd it selfe on me. Loe, heere I lye,
Neuer to rise againe: Thy Mothers poyson'd:
I can no more, the King, the King's too blame

   Ham. The point envenom'd too,
Then venome to thy worke.

Hurts the King.

  All. Treason, Treason

   King. O yet defend me Friends, I am but hurt

   Ham. Heere thou incestuous, murdrous,
Damned Dane,
Drinke off this Potion: Is thy Vnion heere?
Follow my Mother.

King Dyes.

  Laer. He is iustly seru'd.
It is a poyson temp'red by himselfe:
Exchange forgiuenesse with me, Noble Hamlet;
Mine and my Fathers death come not vpon thee,
Nor thine on me.

Dyes.

  Ham. Heauen make thee free of it, I follow thee.
I am dead Horatio, wretched Queene adiew,
You that looke pale, and tremble at this chance,
That are but Mutes or audience to this acte:
Had I but time (as this fell Sergeant death
Is strick'd in his Arrest) oh I could tell you.
But let it be: Horatio, I am dead,
Thou liu'st, report me and my causes right
To the vnsatisfied

   Hor. Neuer beleeue it.
I am more an Antike Roman then a Dane:
Heere's yet some Liquor left

   Ham. As th'art a man, giue me the Cup.
Let go, by Heauen Ile haue't.
Oh good Horatio, what a wounded name,
(Things standing thus vnknowne) shall liue behind me.
If thou did'st euer hold me in thy heart,
Absent thee from felicitie awhile,
And in this harsh world draw thy breath in paine,
To tell my Storie.

March afarre off, and shout within.

What warlike noyse is this?
Enter Osricke.

  Osr. Yong Fortinbras, with conquest come fro[m] Poland
To th' Ambassadors of England giues this warlike volly

   Ham. O I dye Horatio:
The potent poyson quite ore-crowes my spirit,
I cannot liue to heare the Newes from England,
But I do prophesie th' election lights
On Fortinbras, he ha's my dying voyce,
So tell him with the occurrents more and lesse,
Which haue solicited. The rest is silence. O, o, o, o.

Dyes

  Hora. Now cracke a Noble heart:
Goodnight sweet Prince,
And flights of Angels sing thee to thy rest,
Why do's the Drumme come hither?
Enter Fortinbras and English Ambassador, with Drumme, Colours,
and
Attendants.

  Fortin. Where is this sight?
  Hor. What is it ye would see;
If ought of woe, or wonder, cease your search

   For. His quarry cries on hauocke. Oh proud death,
What feast is toward in thine eternall Cell.
That thou so many Princes, at a shoote,
So bloodily hast strooke

   Amb. The sight is dismall,
And our affaires from England come too late,
The eares are senselesse that should giue vs hearing,
To tell him his command'ment is fulfill'd,
That Rosincrance and Guildensterne are dead:
Where should we haue our thankes?
  Hor. Not from his mouth,
Had it th' abilitie of life to thanke you:
He neuer gaue command'ment for their death.
But since so iumpe vpon this bloodie question,
You from the Polake warres, and you from England
Are heere arriued. Giue order that these bodies
High on a stage be placed to the view,
And let me speake to th' yet vnknowing world,
How these things came about. So shall you heare
Of carnall, bloudie, and vnnaturall acts,
Of accidentall iudgements, casuall slaughters
Of death's put on by cunning, and forc'd cause,
And in this vpshot, purposes mistooke,
Falne on the Inuentors head. All this can I
Truly deliuer

   For. Let vs hast to heare it,
And call the Noblest to the Audience.
For me, with sorrow, I embrace my Fortune,
I haue some Rites of memory in this Kingdome,
Which are to claime, my vantage doth
Inuite me,
  Hor. Of that I shall haue alwayes cause to speake,
And from his mouth
Whose voyce will draw on more:
But let this same be presently perform'd,
Euen whiles mens mindes are wilde,
Lest more mischance
On plots, and errors happen

   For. Let foure Captaines
Beare Hamlet like a Soldier to the Stage,
For he was likely, had he beene put on
To haue prou'd most royally:
And for his passage,
The Souldiours Musicke, and the rites of Warre
Speake lowdly for him.
Take vp the body; Such a sight as this
Becomes the Field, but heere shewes much amis.
Go, bid the Souldiers shoote.

Exeunt. Marching: after the which, a Peale of Ordenance are shot
off.


FINIS. The tragedie of HAMLET, Prince of Denmarke.
trade.

The following note of exports I obtained through the kindness of Mr.
Brackenbury, his Majestys consul at Cadiz.

The export of sherry wine and of others under the same denomination,
from Xeres, and Port St. Mary, has been for the years following, as
under:

     In the year 1821, there were exported 1499 butts.
         ---      1822        ---         11,508
         ---      1823        ---         12,476
         ---      1824        ---         15,059
         ---      1825        ---         21,297
         ---      1826        ---         no return.
         ---      1827        ---         20,150
         ---      1828        ---         26,901
         ---      1829        ---         17,839.

I expected to have received the note of the first half-years export of
1830; but I could not obtain it before leaving Cadiz. I may state,
however, that the export of 1830 was expected to fall below fourteen
thousand butts.

Taking the average of the last eight years from the foregoing table,
presuming the export of 1830 to be fourteen thousand butts, the average
export will be seventeen thousand four hundred butts. The price varies
much, from 15_l._ up to 65_l._; but as the lower priced sherries form
the bulk of the export, the average must be stated low; taking the
result of the opinions of the most competent judges, the price of the
export overhead, may be stated at 26_l._ per butt. The value of the
sherries exported is therefore 452,000_l._ sterling--the duty upon the
export is 504,600_l._; so that if freight and the profit of the merchant
in London be added, the consumption of sherries exceeds one million
sterling yearly. It will also be observed from the table, that the
export for the years 1827, 1828, 1829, and 1830, has exceeded that of
1822, 1823, 1824, and 1825, by seventeen thousand five hundred and fifty
butts, though the export of the last two years, has fallen under that of
the two years immediately preceding them.

The grape that produces the wine of Xeres, is a green grape; it is
allowed to become perfectly ripe, being plucked just before it begins to
shrivel: this, in average years, is on the 9th of September,--a day
marked in Catholic countries, by being the day before the feast of the
immaculate Conception; but in less forward years, the plucking is
deferred until the 15th of September, beyond which day it is never
protracted. After the plucking, those growers who are the most attentive
to their wines, place the grapes in baskets, exposed to the sun for
forty-eight hours,--turning and sorting them all the while, according
as they appear to require this attention.

It has often been said that sherry is a compound wine; but this is a
mistake. The best pale and light golden sherries are made from the pure
Xeres grape, with only the addition of two bottles of brandy to a butt,
which is no more than one two-hundred-and-fiftieth part. This brandy is
of an excellent quality; it is imported from Catalunia, and seemed to me
scarcely inferior to the best and purest cogniac. Neither are the deep
golden and brown sherries of the best quality, compound wines, though
they may be called mixed wines. The difference is thus produced:--If a
butt of brown sherry be wanted, a butt of light sherry is boiled down to
one-fifth part of its bulk, till it acquire a deep brown colour; and one
half of this quantity is added to a butt of the best pale sherry, of
course removing from it as much as makes room for this additional
tenth-part of a butt of boiled wine. When it is said that a butt of
light sherry is boiled down, it is not to be understood that this is
wine of an inferior kind; it is wine produced from the Xeres grape,
planted upon a lighter soil, near the mouth of the Guadalquivir, and
producing a somewhat lighter wine. To make a butt of brown sherry, a
butt and a half is therefore required, deducting a tenth part; but the
brown sherry is not more expensive, because the grape from which the
boiled wine is made, is more abundant than the other grape, and
consequently cheaper. This boiled wine is also mixed, in the proportion
of one half, with unboiled wine,--not to be drank, but to be added in
smaller or larger quantities to other sherries, for the mere purpose of
giving them colour, should this be desired by the English merchant. It
is evident, therefore, from these details, that although brown sherry
cannot be said to be a compound wine, inasmuch as it is all the wine of
Xeres,--the pale sherries are nevertheless the purest; and all the
gradations of colour upon which so much stress is laid, have nothing to
do with the quality of the wine, but depend entirely upon the greater or
smaller quantity of boiled wine used for colouring it. Taste in wines is
one of the most capricious things in the world. I tasted, in the cellar
of a merchant in Port St. Mary, a butt of sherry, more than one half of
which was boiled wine,--not used for drinking, or meant for sale; but
kept merely as colouring matter, and which came off as dark coloured as
porter; and I found it delicious. I told the merchant to make an
experiment of it, as curious sherry, and to send it to the English
market; but he said no one would give the price at which he could afford
to sell it: for, to prepare this single butt, three butts had been
required--nearly half a butt of the unboiled wine, and more than two
butts and a half of the boiled wine, reduced to one-fifth.

Amontillado, the produce also of the Xeres grape, is made either
intentionally or accidentally: if it be intended to produce amontillado,
the fruit is plucked a fortnight sooner than for sherry. But it is an
extraordinary fact, that if a hundred butts of wine be taken from a
Xeres vineyard, and treated in precisely the same way, several of them
will, in all probability, turn out amontillado, without the grower or
the merchant being able to assign any reason for this. Amontillado is
the purest of all wine; for it will bear no admixture of either brandy,
or boiled wine; whatever is added to it, entirely spoils it.

Sherries, when adulterated, are not usually adulterated by the London
wine merchant, with the exception of those extremely inferior wines,
which, from their excessive low price, no one can expect to be genuine
wines, and which are probably mixed with Cape. But the class of wines
which pass under the denomination of low-priced sherries, are not
adulterated in London, but at Xeres--by the grower, not by the exporter.
These wines are mixed with the wines of Moguer, and with a larger
proportion of brandy; and the exporter, in purchasing them from the
grower, is quite well aware of their quality: but, being ordered to send
a large cargo of low-priced wines, he is forced to purchase and export
these. It may be laid down as a fact, that genuine sherry, _one year
old_, cannot be imported under thirty shillings per dozen; and if to
this be added, the profit of the merchant, and the accumulation of
interest upon capital on older wine, it is obvious that genuine sherry,
four years old, cannot be purchased in England under forty-five
shillings.

The principal depositories of wine at Xeres and at Port St. Marys, are
not cellars, but lightly constructed buildings, containing various
chambers. There are generally three tier of casks, laid horizontally
upon beams; and in the principal vaults, as many as two thousand five
hundred butts may be seen. I noticed many casks without bungs; this, I
was told, is not at all prejudicial to the wine, but, on the contrary,
if a brick be merely laid upon the hole, to keep out dust, the admission
of air is considered an advantage. Sherry is a very hardy wine; and is
well known, by the merchants of Xeres, to be improved by exposure to the
weather. An illustration of this fact lately occurred: the roof of one
of the wine-houses fell in; and, not being rebuilt, the wine was left
exposed to the opposite temperatures of winter and summer; and this wine
was celebrated as the finest that for many years had left Xeres.

Before visiting Xeres, one cannot have any idea of the variety in
flavour, and the various gradations of excellence in sherry; and, after
tasting the primest samples of each kind, from the palest straw, up to
the deep brown, it is impossible to say which is the finest. I need
scarcely repeat again, that it is entirely by the aroma and by the
taste--not at all by the colour, that sherries are to be judged. The
_wide_ differences in colour, depend entirely upon the proportion of
boiled wine; while those slighter shades, perceptible among the pale and
light golden wines, are owing to some small difference in the ripeness
of the fruit.

A few houses, of the greatest capital, are growers, as well as
merchants; but, generally speaking, the wine is bought of the growers
when on the lees. The exporter who is also a grower, has an advantage
over the other merchant, in the perfect security he has, that no wine of
Moguer has been mixed with the sherry. But the merchants are not afraid
to trust to their knowledge and experience, in being able to detect
adulterated wine; and besides, those who are perfectly accustomed to the
trade can tell, before vintage time, by merely looking at a vineyard,
within two or three butts of the quantity the vineyard will produce: so
that, when one comes to treat for the produce of those vineyards which
he has had in his eye, he discovers by the quantity, whether it has been
much adulterated with Moguer. An experienced merchant possesses an
intimate acquaintance with the quality of the different vineyards; among
which, the most essential differences are found, even when they lie
contiguous. It is, of course, this difference in the quality of the
vine, that creates the difference in price and quality among the genuine
unadulterated sherries. In this trade, as in every other, the capitalist
has an advantage; for, if he advances a few bags of dollars to the
cultivator during the summer, he has the first choice of the November
sales, when the article is always cheaper.

It is difficult to say what is the return for land under a vineyard in
Xeres; this, of course, depends upon the quality of the produce, and
partly upon the convenience of road and market. But all the vineyards of
Xeres, require great expense, and unintermitting labour. The following
is a summary of the management of the vine producing sherry.

The first operation is to take up the canes, or props, immediately after
the vintage is gathered: the second operation immediately follows this;
it is, to dig small pits about a yard square round each plant, that the
vines may obtain a permanent advantage from the rains. There is then an
interval of labour, till after the first rains have fallen; and in the
early part of January, when this has taken place, the third operation of
the vine-grower is, to prune the whole plant; and, it is a curious fact,
that the vineyard which is the earliest pruned, is the latest in
budding; the plant too, is always better, the vine stronger, and more
firmly rooted. The next operation is to close the pits, in order that
the moisture which has been received, may be retained. After this, but a
little later, the whole vineyard is dug up, to loosen the soil. The next
operation is to free the soil of grass and weeds, by turning it over;
and this is repeated once, twice, or thrice, according as the rains may
have reproduced the weeds, and rendered a repetition of this labour
necessary. All these operations are concluded by the middle of March.
When the vineyard has been thoroughly cleared of weeds, the next care
of the husbandman is to smoothe the soil, which is done twice, at an
interval of three weeks: this done, he cuts off the vicious sprouts at
the roots of the plants, which hinder their nourishment; he then
pulverises the land to a fine powder, and, lastly, he puts in the stakes
to support the coming harvest. These are the distinct operations to be
performed in succession, and each at its fixed time: but these do not
comprehend all the labours of the vineyard; for, during the whole of
this time, there are many lesser cares with which the grower must occupy
himself; the most unintermitting and most laborious of these, being the
search, and destruction of insects. Such are the toils which are
necessary to procure us the enjoyment of a glass of genuine sherry. The
Xeres vintage is not considered an uncertain crop; the climate in that
country may be depended upon; so that labour is certain, or almost
certain of its reward. The wine trade employs, one way and another, the
whole inhabitants of Xeres, and Port St. Mary: the latter is a very
rising place; it is a more convenient point of export than Xeres, being
close to the sea; and new wine establishments are every year springing
up there. At present, there are sixteen wine-houses in Xeres, and nine
in Port St. Mary: the former would gladly change their position, if this
were possible; for the merchant of Xeres has a manifest disadvantage in
not being able to see his goods shipped, and put beyond the reach of
damage and plunder. At Xeres, it is not always possible to know the
state of the weather at sea, and it often happens that a cargo is sent
down to Port St. Mary, where it lies many days exposed to both damage
and roguery. The city of Xeres itself, possesses no interest apart from
that which arises from its wine trade. Good sherry is an expensive wine
even at Port St. Mary and Cadiz. The small wine, the _vin ordinaire_ of
the district, is about 6_d._ per bottle; but this, although passing
under the generic name of sherry, is not produced from the Xeres grape,
though there is so much similarity, that the sherry flavour is at once
detected in it. But either at Port St. Mary or at Cadiz, a bottle of
good sherry is charged 3_s._ 4_d._ in a coffee-house or hotel; and if
any thing very superior be asked for, a dollar will be demanded.

After spending one day in Xeres, and another, in riding over the
vineyards, I returned to Port St. Mary, where I had also the pleasure of
partaking of the hospitalities of its merchants. In the evening I went
to the theatre, where I found good reason to be greatly surprised at the
license which was permitted on the stage--so opposite from any thing I
had before witnessed in Spain. A friar of the Carmelite order, was
introduced, as one of the dramatis person, and he was made to carry on
an intrigue with the daughter of a barber, and to offer her the money
which he had just received for some masses; and in another part of the
play, a song was sung in evident burlesque of the kind of singing heard
at religious ceremonies. With all this, the audience was delighted. But
neither in Madrid nor in Seville, nor in any of the towns in the east of
Spain, would this have been tolerated by the public authorities; nor
would it even have been acceptable to the audience. If the liberal
party can be said to be strong in any part of Spain, that part is the
country and cities surrounding the bay of Cadiz. I heard several
merchants of this neighbourhood express an opinion, that an attempt to
revolutionize this part of Spain, would be more likely to be successful
than if made in any other quarter. The population of this neighbourhood
is large, and would be a formidable party if opposed to the government.
The population of Cadiz exceeds seventy thousand, St. Lucar contains
twenty-two thousand, Puerto de Santa Maria seventeen thousand, Puerto
Real twelve thousand, Isla thirty-two thousand; altogether forming
within a very narrow district, a population of one hundred and fifty
thousand, without including villages.

The storm that commenced the morning I left Cadiz, had increased; and
when I walked down to the quay at Port St. Mary, to cross the bay to
Cadiz, I found that that port, as well as the port of Cadiz, was shut;
and I was accordingly forced to hire a caleche to go round the bay by
land, a distance of seven leagues and a half. I scarcely regretted
this, as I should thus have an opportunity of seeing more of the
country.

Leaving Port St. Mary, I passed through an almost uncultivated country,
towards Puerto Real, skirting the edge of the bay; the country on the
land side being covered with furze, and intersected by hedges of
magnificent aloes and Indian fig; and with wild olives thinly scattered
over the soil; and farther back, were seen the outer ridges of the
Sierra de Ronda. As we proceeded, a singular spectacle was presented on
the side towards the bay: immense lagunes lay between the road and the
sea, thickly sprinkled with white pyramids, and assuming the exact
representation of an extensive encampment. These were pyramids of salt:
the sea is admitted into shallow reservoirs excavated in the soil, and
the salt is formed by evaporation. Nothing can be more uninteresting
than the road round the bay, till we enter the Isle of Leon, which is
separated from the main land by a drawbridge. Soon after, I reached
Isla, which is certainly one of the prettiest towns in Spain; I never
saw a cleaner or prettier street, than the principal street of Isla.
Every house is of the purest white, and every range of windows on every
house, has its green veranda. Isla is a sadly fallen town: the great
naval school, and extensive docks of Caraccas, in its immediate
neighbourhood, once gave employment to thousands, and life and
prosperity to Isla; but now, there is not a ship on the stocks, and not
an _elve_ in the college.

Soon after leaving Isla, I entered upon the long and narrow tongue of
land which connects Cadiz with the mainland; the tongue becomes narrower
as we approach Cadiz, and during at least a league, it varies from two
to three hundred yards broad, including a part of the sands, which are
covered at high tide: the causeway itself is not one hundred yards
broad. About a mile and a half from Cadiz, I passed a magnificent
fortress, called the Cortadura, because it cuts the tongue of land
across. This fortress was built in the year 1812, and it entirely covers
the approach to Cadiz on the land side; presenting a formidable range of
batteries, mounting one hundred and forty guns. Before entering Cadiz,
another strong battery must be passed, so that Cadiz may be considered
impregnable on the land side; at all events, not to be reduced without
immense sacrifices.




CHAPTER XV.

CADIZ, AND JOURNEY OVERLAND TO GIBRALTAR.

     Peculiarities of Cadiz; a Fte; the Ladies of Cadiz; curious Whims
     and Usages; Morals; the Religious Bodies; Murillos last Picture;
     Mr. Brackenburys Pictures; Remarks upon Consular Remuneration; the
     two Cathedrals; effects upon the Commercial Prosperity of Cadiz,
     from its having been created a Free Port; State of the Road between
     Cadiz and Gibraltar; Departure from Cadiz; Chiclana; Morning
     Scenes; a Venta; the African Coast; Wild Scenery; Dangers of the
     Road; Suspicious Circumstance; Tariffa; another Venta; Journey
     through the Mountains to Algesiras; View of Gibraltar; Arrival.


Cadiz is less interesting than some others of the Spanish cities,
because it is less purely Spanish: the number of foreign mercantile
houses, and the concourse of strangers always to be seen in Cadiz, gives
to the population a more mixed and motley aspect than that which belongs
to the population of Seville, Madrid, Valencia, or indeed, of any
Spanish city--with the exception, perhaps, of Barcellona: and in the
mode of life, too, foreign usages have made great inroads upon the
exclusiveness and peculiarities of Spanish customs. The table is better
served in Cadiz than elsewhere, and strangers are more frequently seated
at it: the hours of repast too are later. At the table of a person in
the middle ranks of life, the puchero is seldom seen; and among the
upper classes there is an affectation of a preference of French wines,
sufficiently ridiculous in a city situated so near Xeres, and in a
country in which every little district produces its own peculiar, and
often exquisitely flavoured wine. But those very things that diminish,
in some degree, the interest of Cadiz in the eyes of a stranger, render
it the most attractive city in Spain, for one who desires to pass a few
months agreeably. There is, there, no shrinking from the eye of the
stranger; hospitality is understood in its true sense; and no one need
fear, in Cadiz, that the time may hang heavy on his hands.

Externally, Cadiz has its advantages and its drawbacks; the streets are
clean, and many of them sufficiently wide for the climate, which is
delightful; but which, in the latitude of thirty-six, cannot be
otherwise than hot; and there is no want of finely situated, commodious,
and even elegant houses, for those who can afford to live in them. But
the chief external charm of Cadiz, is found in its ramparts, and in the
delightful promenade which they afford. The day of my arrival in Cadiz,
as well as the day of my return to it from Xeres, were both too stormy
for the enjoyment of a promenade; but the day following, was calm and
beautiful; and I spent half the morning, and all the evening, upon the
ramparts. The views are of course marine views, and scarcely to be
exceeded in beauty, from the rampart fronting the bay, and Puerto de
Santa Maria. The bay itself, the opposite shore, the many towns that
sprinkle it, the distant Sierras of Xeres and Ronda, the vessels lying
at anchor in the harbour, the innumerable boats crossing the
ferry--fishing, or sailing, or rowing for pleasure--and the fine
irregular line of handsome white buildings that lie along the Alameda,
form altogether, a delightful and animated picture.

But Cadiz lies under this great disadvantage, that it is impossible to
leave the city, and walk or ride into the country; there is no country
in the immediate neighbourhood of Cadiz: the city occupies every rood of
the little Peninsula upon which it stands; and before one can get into
the fields, it is necessary either to travel along two or three leagues
of causeway, or to cross the bay to Port St. Mary. The rampart, the
squares, and the streets, are the only walks; and charming as the former
is, I think if I resided in Cadiz, I should soon long for the verdure of
the open fields, in place of the green sea; the shade of trees, in place
of the shadow of houses; and the song of birds, instead of the oceans
voice.

Whilst I remained in Cadiz, there was a fte and illumination one
evening, in honour, I think, of the queens accouchement. The streets
and squares, particularly the Plaza de San Antonio, were brilliantly
illuminated; and in this square, which is one of the paseos of Cadiz,
all the population was assembled from eight till eleven oclock; and I
of course seized so favourable an opportunity of judging of those charms
which I had always heard spoken of as the peculiar distinction of the
ladies of this gay and voluptuous city. Horace, no bad judge of these
matters, celebrates the beauty of the women of Cadiz; and later and
better poets than Horace, speak in raptures of the charms of these fair
and frail ones. Whether it was, that so high authorities had their
influence upon my judgment, or that sun-light is less favourable to
Spanish beauty than the light of torches, blended with that of the
moon,--or that the women of Cadiz are really deserving of the praises
that have been lavished upon them, I will not pretend to determine; but
I must be candid enough to admit, that while I sat at the door of a
caf, from which a strong light blazed across the piazza, and
scrutinized the passers by, I did see some splendid forms, and some
lustrous eyes,--some countenances, in short, that might remind one of
Gulnare. The women of Cadiz are, beyond question, the finest in Spain.

Presuming upon their charms, the ladies of this city indulge in some
curious whims. Every family of any consequence, has a state-bed, highly
ornamented, and placed in an elegantly fitted up apartment; and the use
made of it is this:--at a particular time of the year, generally after
Lent, the seora of the house, or her daughter, if _she_ has reached,
and her mother has passed a certain age, feigns sickness. Having
previously made all the necessary arrangements, she takes to her bed:
there she lies in an elegant night dress, under embroidered sheets, her
head resting upon a rose-coloured silk pillow,--and a table stands near,
with silver candlesticks, and wax lights,--a little silver bell, and
several vases containing choice perfumes. There she receives company;
there all her male and female acquaintances resort; and there, attired
to be seen, and bent upon admiration, she listens to the language of
mock condolence, pleasing flattery, and undisguised gallantry! There is
another occasion, upon which the state-bed is used. When a woman is
_accouche_, the child is baptized next day,--and upon this day, the
mother holds a _leve_: the company is received in the saloon; the
folding doors which usually divide this reception-room from the
state-bedroom, are thrown open, and the lady lies in state to receive
the compliments of her many visitors. This leve is held by women of all
classes, though all have not a state-bed to recline on; and it often
happens among the lower ranks, that a woman will arrange the chamber,
make and adorn her bed, and after having prepared it for her own
reception, will pop into it to receive company. I was informed that the
ladies of Cadiz are adepts in the manufactory of the female person; that
in looking at them, we may frequently apply with truth the well known
proverb, all is not gold that glitters; and that the most experienced
dress-maker of the British metropolis would be all in amaze at the
various and subtle uses to which the cork tree is put in the city of
Cadiz. All this scandal, however, was told me by an English lady; and I
hope for the sake of the ladies of Cadiz, as well as of my own
reminiscences of the Plaza de San Antonio, that it may be calumny.

Morals in Cadiz are, if possible, even lower than in the other Spanish
cities: female virtue is a thing almost unknown, and scarcely
appreciated. It is with difficulty and with pain we can bring ourselves
to believe, that in a civilized country, there should exist a state of
society in which that purest gem--female modesty--bears no price; and it
is unpleasant to have the conviction thrust upon us, that the innate
virgin pride, which we have ever delighted to believe inseparable from
the female character, should be so loosely rooted, as to wither away
under the baleful influences of habit and opinion. Yet how can we resist
this conclusion? I could give innumerable examples of the depraved state
of morals in Cadiz: I have at this moment before me, a closely written
page of notes, full of these; and even the names of individuals are
mentioned; but I have turned the leaf, and will not sully my page with
details which might indeed gratify curiosity, but which could add
nothing to the truth of the statement I have made, that in Cadiz,
female virtue is a thing almost unknown, and scarcely appreciated.

The morals of the religious bodies in Cadiz are exemplary; nothing, at
all events, is said to their disadvantage; and in a city such as Cadiz,
this is evidence enough in their favour. Formerly, the morals of the
monastic orders in Cadiz were notoriously bad; but there is now so
little disposition in that city, to affect blindness towards the
feelings of the clergy--free opinions in religion have made so great
progress in Cadiz--and so watchful an eye is kept upon the conduct of
the religious bodies, that purity of morals could alone protect them
against public obloquy.

In Cadiz, there are not many objects of curiosity to visit: it has no
antiquities now visible; few public buildings worthy of notice; and a
very scanty assortment of good pictures. In search of the last, I
visited the churches and convents, without finding any thing to reward
my labour. In one convent, indeed--the Capuchins--is found that picture
which last employed the hand of Murillo. He, however, only designed it,
and laid on the first colours; the work being completed by a pupil. In
its colouring, there is of course nothing of Murillo to be seen; but in
the composition, the genius of the master may be detected; and the
picture is at all events interesting, as being the last of his
works--more interesting indeed because an unfinished work--since we know
in looking at it, that _there_, for the last time, his hand gave visible
manifestation of his genius.

The only other pictures that repaid the labour of a visit,--and they
well repaid it,--are in the possession of Mr. Brackenbury, his majestys
consul at Cadiz. Nowhere is there a more exquisite morsel of Murillo to
be seen, than the Infant Bacchus, tasting, for the first time, the
juice of the grape. He looks as if he quaffed immortality; and as a work
of art, this is one of the finest specimens, both in colouring, and in
every other excellence, of the best days of Murillo. In this collection
there are many other admirable pictures; among these, a Bassano,
greatly superior to either of the two in the Madrid gallery. But I
understand, that some of the choicest works of Murillo, have been sent
by Mr. Brackenbury to England; and that the amateurs in this country,
may probably have an opportunity of increasing their knowledge and
admiration of Murillo, by contemplating these admirable productions of
his genius. I cannot allow this opportunity to escape, without
expressing my warm acknowledgments to Mr. Brackenbury, not only for the
pleasant hours enjoyed in his society, but also for the valuable
information upon many points which I received from him. Nor can I help
adding, that if those who speak so much, and so loudly, respecting the
high emoluments derived by his Majestys consuls, would visit Cadiz,
they might find cause to alter their opinion. No representative of the
English government ought to have any temptation to shut his doors
against those who are recommended to him,--those who need his
protection,--or even those who come accidentally in his way. Generous
minded men, such as the representative of the British government in
Cadiz, do not, and cannot yield to the temptations of avarice,--perhaps
the suggestions of prudence. But the claims upon consular hospitality
are ruinous in a city like Cadiz, where, besides its own trade, half the
vessels bound for Gibraltar, call; and where the steam-boat for the
Levant, every fortnight discharges its passengers. A consul, at such a
port, is exposed to many inconveniences, and has a difficult duty to
perform. Nothing is so easy as to obtain a letter to a consul: friends
and relations in England,--men who have travelled, and once dined with
him,--consuls in other ports,--an ambassador will seldom refuse an
application for a letter to the British consul at this, or that port;
for he is considered a sort of public property, bound, almost by the
duties of his office, to pay attention to strangers; and if a traveller
carry a letter to a consul, and is not offered the hospitalities of his
house, he is immediately set down as a very penurious representative of
the British government. All this is wrong, and ought to be righted. I am
not advocating ostentation, extravagance, or over liberality in his
Majestys consuls. They are not called upon to be princely in their
hospitalities; but they are expected to act like Englishmen, and
gentlemen; and although it forms no part of their consular duties, to
invite to their tables every stranger who brings an introduction in his
hand, there are some noble feelings in the breast, that are felt to be
more urgent than mere duties; and it is not for the respectability of
the British monarchy, that these feelings should be entirely repressed.
The remuneration of consuls ought to vary with the calls for expenditure
that are made upon them. Those variations in commercial prosperity,
which affect the different ports, require that a new scale should, from
time to time, be adopted.--I will not pursue farther, a subject that may
perhaps be called a digression.

The only buildings in Cadiz worth visiting, are the two cathedrals; the
old and the new. The old is not remarkable for any thing excepting some
treasures and relics; the new is chiefly interesting, because it is
gradually falling into ruin. It was begun more than a hundred years ago,
and the fund, derived from a duty upon imports from America, was
entrusted to a board of commissioners. The commissioners
quarrelled,--the fund did not find its way into the proper channel, and
the cathedral was left unfinished,--and unfinished it will certainly for
ever remain. The style of the building was meant to be in the most
gorgeous taste of Composite architecture: ornament is heaped upon
ornament; and both in material and in workmanship, its richness cannot
be exceeded; but it is fast falling into decay. In many parts it is
uncovered; the excellence of workmanship has yielded to the influence of
the weather, and the marbles have lost their beauty and freshness. The
principal area of the interior is used as a rope-walk, while other parts
have been converted into depositories of mahogany. Underneath the
building are vast vaults, by some said to have been intended as a
pantheon; by others, believed to have been excavated with a view to
religious persecution and punishment. From an inspection of these
vaults, the former surmise appeared to me the more probable.

The recent erection of Cadiz into a free port, has not brought with it
all the advantages that were anticipated; but it has, nevertheless, had
an important influence upon its prosperity. Immediately upon Cadiz being
created a free port, immense shipments of manufactured goods were made
from England; and several branches of Manchester houses were
established there. So improvident had been the export from England, that
last autumn, calicos and muslins were bought in Cadiz 20 per cent.
cheaper than in England. But the chief increase in the commerce of
Cadiz, arises from the facilities now afforded for illicit trade with
the rest of Spain. This is principally seen in the import of tobacco,
which comes free from the Havannah, and which is not intended so much
for the consumption of the city, as for supplying the contraband trade
with the ports and coast of Spain. There are said to be six thousand
persons in Cadiz employed in twisting cigars. But it is not in tobacco
only that Cadiz has drawn to itself the illicit trade of the
Mediterranean. There is also an extensive contraband trade in English
manufactured goods, which can be bought throughout Spain, at only thirty
per cent. above the price at which they cost in Cadiz. Gibraltar
formerly monopolized the contraband trade of the Spanish coast; and the
effects resulting from Cadiz having been made a free port, have proved
most ruinous to the interests of Gibraltar; the merchants of the latter
place have endeavoured to support themselves by establishing branch
houses in Cadiz, and of these there are no fewer than twenty-five. The
change in the commercial prosperity of Cadiz has materially affected its
population,--in 1827, the inhabitants scarcely reached fifty-two
thousand; in 1830, they exceeded sixty-seven thousand.

The whole commercial system of Spain is most erroneously conceived. The
prohibitory system is carried to a length absolutely ruinous to the fair
trader, and highly injurious to the revenue. The immense duties upon
admissible articles, and the total prohibition of others, has occasioned
a most extensive contraband trade, both externally,--with the various
ports, and along the coast of Spain, and internally,--throughout the
whole of the kingdom; and by this trade, admissible articles are
introduced into the interior, at from one to three hundred per cent.
below the duties imposed. Government could not fail to be benefited by
permitting the importation of articles of general use, upon payment of
such a duty as would allow the sale of the article at a lower price
than is now paid by the consumer to the smuggler. As one example of the
impolicy of the system, I may cite a fact respecting the trade in salted
fish, the returns of which I have before me. The import of this article
into Cadiz in one year, before that city was made a free port, amounted
to four vessels, whose cargoes reached 4092 cwt.; while at the free port
of Gibraltar, in the same year, forty-one vessels entered, with 89,106
cwt. _the whole of which was intended for the illicit trade_, and passed
into Spain through the hands of the smugglers. The duty upon this
article is more than one hundred per cent.; the smuggler considers
himself remunerated by a gain of twenty-five per cent., so that the
article which finds its way into the market through the contraband
trade, is sold seventy-five per cent. cheaper than that which is
admitted upon payment of the regular duties.

The duties upon British manufactured goods, amount almost to a
prohibition; they often reach one hundred per cent.; and this trade is
therefore also in the hands of the smuggler, who obtains the profit
which, under a more wholesome system, might go into the treasury of the
kingdom. The fraudulent dealer is also greatly assisted by the custom of
granting a royal license to individuals to import a certain limited
quantity of prohibited goods; an expediency resorted to in order to meet
the exigences of the state: and under the license to enter a hundred
tons of merchandize,--the merchant enters perhaps a thousand tons,--a
deception easily practised in a country where, among the public
officers, a scale of bribery is perfectly understood and acted upon.

I must not forget to mention, that the distinction of free port,
conferred upon Cadiz, was a government expedient to raise money; and
that the sum paid by the city for this privilege, is raised by duties
levied upon the entrance of every inland article of consumption.

The road between Cadiz and Gibraltar has long been notorious for its
difficulties and danger: it is altogether a mule track, lying partly
through the outposts of the Sierras of Xeres and of Ronda, and partly
along the sea-coast, and totally impassable during rainy weather, both
on account of the swampy nature of the soil, and of the numerous streams
which a mountain storm may convert in a few hours into impetuous and
impracticable torrents. The accommodations too, are of the worst kind.
Between Chiclana, which lies near Cadiz, and Algesiras, opposite to
Gibraltar, a distance of nearly eighty miles, there is only one town,
and the ventas are of the most miserable description:--but these are
difficulties only; the dangers are still more formidable. From the
middle of last June, till the middle of August in the same year, no
fewer than fifty-three travellers had been robbed upon this road: many
of these robberies had been attended with violence; and, in some
instances, the travellers had been taken into the mountains, and long
detained in the hope of ransom. More than two months had indeed elapsed
since these robberies had been committed, and the danger was therefore
less; the regular band under Don Jos had been broken up, and twenty-one
of their number were at that time under sentence of death at St. Roqu;
but the road was still considered unsafe--the post from Malaga had been
robbed only the day before, and I was strongly counselled to go to
Malaga by sea. It is frequently, however, such roads as these, that are
most worthy the attention of the traveller; and as my object was to see
Spain, I concluded a bargain with a man who had the reputation of being
honest, for three horses and his own attendance; for which I agreed to
pay twenty-one dollars.

In travelling between Cadiz and Gibraltar, the plan usually recommended
is, to leave Cadiz in the afternoon, and sleep at the town of Chiclana;
the following day a push is made to reach Tariffa, or the Venta de la
Jondal; and the third day, a moderate journey brings the traveller to
Gibraltar. I left Cadiz therefore about two oclock, and proceeded along
the causeway, and through Isla, both of which I have already spoken of
in returning from Xeres to Cadiz. In the course of four leagues, I was
stopped no fewer than five times by custom-house officers, and was
obliged each time to have a _peceta_ ready, to avoid the inconvenience
of search: this is only a part of the system of bribery and robbery
which pervades every public department in Spain; these men have scarcely
any salary; and for the sake of a paltry saving, government allows
itself to be robbed to a hundred times the amount, by the contraband
trade, which is connived at by all the under employes. Shortly after
leaving Isla, I left the Xeres road, and turned to the right, through a
dreary and swampy plain that extended nearly to Chiclana: it was almost
dark when we yet wanted a league of the town; but we put our horses into
a gallop--and no horses go more agreeably than the little
Andalusians--and arrived about eight oclock at the door of the posada.
Here we found tolerable accommodation for this part of Spain--some good
fresh eggs, and a stretcher to sleep upon--and at five next morning we
mounted, and trotted out of the town.

It still wanted nearly two hours to sunrise; but the crescent moon
lighted our path. It has been said, truly, that the waning moon is the
moon of the traveller. In southern countries, where the nature of the
climate creates a necessity for night journeys, or in any country when
a long journey is necessary, it cheers many a lonely hour, and gives
security to the traveller in uncertain and dangerous paths. When day
dawned, I found myself travelling among uncultivated hills, with pine
trees scattered over them, and the ground entirely covered with the
crocus, and many other beautiful flowers; the track seemed to depend
entirely upon the knowledge of the guide, who wound in and out among the
glades and the trees, and up and down the declivities, with the assured
step of a man who knows his business. The sun rose with its usual
splendour; and soon after, we descended into a valley full of pleasing,
and even cheerful scenes. No one could have believed it to be the
beginning of November; it was like a July morning in England,--calm, and
mild, and sunny,--the sky was without a cloud, and the little birds were
at their play and their song. The valley was finely wooded, and covered
with thousands of aromatic shrubs; a flock of milk-white sheep was
feeding in one place, and a small herd of cattle in another; two or
three muleteers, and their trains, were winding down the neighbouring
heights; and a peasant, with his gun, and two dogs, was wading among the
underwood, in search of provender for his cabin. From this valley, we
passed again into a more deserted country, where, in one spot, I
observed a small hut constructed of branches of trees, bound together by
the Esparto rush, and inhabited by a woman, who brought a bottle of
brandy to the door, and tempted the muleteer by an encomium upon its
excellence. The owner of the hut was no doubt the man we had seen with
his gun and dogs. Soon afterwards, we came in sight of Veg, a small
village situated upon a conical hill about one thousand feet high, which
stands at one side of a charming fertile valley, full of orange groves
and fig trees; and at the foot of the hill, we stopped at a venta to
refresh the horses, and ourselves. This was a wretched place, where
nothing could be had to eat, and where there was neither table nor
chair; a little hot water however, was got with some difficulty; and
with tea without sugar or milk, and bread, which I had brought along
with me, I made an indifferent breakfast. The master of the venta and
his wife, struck me as being two of the most suspicious-looking people I
had seen in Spain; and the guide afterwards almost admitted that they
were not to be depended upon. It was in this venta, about three months
before, that a robbery, attended with some violence, was committed: ten
banditti entered, while three travellers were at supper; and it was well
known that the owners of the venta were not unacquainted with some of
the number.

From this venta, there are two roads to Gibraltar; one, which leads to
Tariffa, about thirty-four miles distant,--the other, by a solitary
venta, considerably nearer. The master of the venta strongly urged us to
go by the latter; but having been expressly cautioned against this in
Cadiz, I resolved to keep to my original plan, and go to Tariffa; but,
in such cases, it is always wise to keep ones counsel. Accordingly, I
pretended to be convinced by his reasoning; but the moment we left the
venta, I told the guide that I was resolved to go by Tariffa; and he,
although more disposed towards the shortest road than I relished,
promised that I should be obeyed.

For a short time after leaving the venta, there was some appearance of a
road; but it soon terminated, and we struck to the left, among wide
green slopes, thickly scattered with fine clumps of ilex, beneath which,
many herds of swine were feeding. We passed two or three mud cabins,
with a patch of cultivation round them; at the door of one of these, an
old man was seated upon a bundle of rushes, and a fine athletic young
man stood beside him leaning upon a long gun. The picture was striking;
but it is by persons like these, more perhaps than by regular banditti,
that the solitary traveller runs the risk of being robbed. Soon
afterwards a young man, habited something like a soldier in undress,
joined us: he said he was running away from Xeres, having been detected
in some contraband transaction, and that he was going to Tariffa. It is
never safe in Spain, to join company with strangers: this man and the
guide immediately began to differ as to the road; and the guide, after
some altercation, yielded to the other, whose good intentions I had
afterwards the strongest reasons for doubting.

The country through which we passed, after leaving the venta where we
breakfasted, was for the most part uncultivated; here and there, a
little corn land was to be seen; and I noticed one or two ploughs at
work: herds of cattle, horses, and sheep occasionally gave life to the
landscape; and now and then a man with his gun, ranged the brushwood, or
was seated upon a bank: but there were no houses, and no stationary
inhabitants: whoever we met seemed to be far from home; and every little
while, a monumental cross was seen by the way-side; I counted no fewer
than twenty-seven during the days journey.

Towards evening we began to descend rapidly; and after winding among
some narrow rocky defiles, we came suddenly upon the sea. For some hours
before, I had noticed very elevated mountains towards the south-east,
rising above the lower hills that lay around; these, before reaching the
sea, had seemed to be close at hand, and I was much puzzled to
understand what mountains they could be, since I knew we were fast
approaching the coast. It had never occurred to me that we had all day
been travelling towards the Streights; and the sudden opening from which
the sea burst upon me, explained my difficulty. These were the mountains
of Africa; and the coast of Morocco rose boldly before me at the
distance of a few leagues. It was impossible to look upon the coast of
Africa for the first time, without peculiar emotions. Africa, its
untrodden solitudes, and mighty and unknown rivers: its swarthy kings
and savage people: its wonders and its wrongs. The mind travelled
backward to Egypt and her glories--to Carthage and her dominion--to the
Moors, their past conquests, and present debasement; and the eye,
looking beyond the barrier of mountains that seemed guarding a fabled
land, wandered over the desert of Zahara, and the reedy rivers; and
descried the solitary white man walking by their banks,--seeking glory,
and finding a grave!

Soon after reaching the sea-shore, it became dusk, and in place of being
now at our journeys end, we were yet some leagues distant from it. I
have seldom looked upon a wilder or more desolate scene, than that
which lay around. Between us and the sea, was a succession of dry sand
hills--on the left, vast fragments of rock were scattered below the
cliffs, that rose in dark and rugged outline above, crowned by the ruins
of a Moorish watch-tower;--and the roar of the sea, and the deepening
dusk, and the place, and the solitude, and the helplessness of a
traveller, all conspired to fix the scene deeply in my memory. It soon
became entirely dark, excepting the light of the stars; but in such
places, darkness scarcely adds to the insecurity of the traveller,
because it conceals him. Almost all the robberies that take place, are
at dusk; or sometimes, in broad day; and, unless one has been seen to
set out upon a journey towards evening, darkness may be considered a
defence. But in this journey, there were other dangers than robbery, to
be apprehended; the road was intersected here and there, by arms of the
sea, which, but for the reflection of the stars in the water, I must
frequently have plunged into. Sometimes a shallow was found; and
sometimes, by making a circuit, a bridge was discovered, but of the
frailest and most dangerous kind. Once, following the young man who had
joined company with us, and whose white jacket was a convenient guide, I
found myself, before I was aware, upon a bridge not a yard in width;
without parapet, and, in many places, loose beneath. The bridge was
long, and a broad arm of the sea was beneath: it was impossible to
dismount, and I could only trust to my horse, which, fortunately, was
both sure-footed and bold.

Shortly after this, a circumstance occurred, which gave rise to strong,
and very natural suspicions of the young man who accompanied us: he was,
at this time, about twenty yards in advance; and I was surprised by
hearing a loud whistle. I immediately pushed forward and seized his arm,
and asked why he whistled--but not before he had found time to whistle a
second time. He said his mother lived _there_, pointing to a little
height close to the sea, upon which something like a house, or a tower,
could be discerned. This seemed very like a fiction; I have little doubt
that the place he pointed to was a rendezvous of contrabandisters, with
whom he was connected, and these are often the worst robbers. What might
be the meaning of the signal, I was unable to tell, but I resolved to
watch him.

I thought this journey was to have no end--there was still no appearance
of Tariffa--and, when I supposed we must be close to the gate, the guide
stopped at a lone house close to the sea; and, telling us we were yet a
league distant from the town, said, I might find accommodation in this
house: but this I refused, and insisted upon going on; and at length I
was rewarded by the welcome sight of lights; and in a few minutes we
were among the straggling houses that lie outside of the town. The gates
of the town were shut; and the guard told me, that no one could enter
without permission from the governor. Leaving the horses standing, I
approached under an escort; and a soldier upon the top of the wall,
asked our business. I replied, that an English gentleman, travelling
with a regular passport, requested permission to enter the town; but,
after waiting a full half-hour, the permission was refused, and I was
obliged, in consequence, to go to a most miserable venta beyond the
gates. There was, perhaps, some excuse for this strictness. Tariffa is
at all times a sort of prison, where convicted persons are kept at
large; and the knowledge that there were, at that time, some refugees in
Gibraltar, and that an attempt had been all but made upon Algesiras, was
sufficient to justify a refusal to do what is at all times a matter of
special favour.

At the wretched venta to which the guide conducted me, nothing could be
had to eat, excepting a little cold fish, which had been stewed with oil
and garlick. I need scarcely say, there were no knives or forks; these
are luxuries rarely to be met with in a Spanish venta. Every Spaniard is
provided with his own clasp knife; and as for forks, they can be
dispensed with: a traveller in Spain will therefore do well to provide
himself with these necessaries. There is one comfort, however, that can,
with few exceptions, be always had, even in the worst venta,--good wine;
very different, both in flavour and strength, from the wretched beverage
generally set before one in the French _auberge_. And this was the only
comfort to be got at the venta at Tariffa; for sleep was out of the
question, in a bed that had long been in the undisturbed possession of
other living creatures. Next morning, the mistress of the house demanded
two dollars for her accommodations. When a charge is exorbitant in
Spain, less will always be accepted; and one dollar seemed to me quite
sufficient payment for a bottle of wine that probably cost a real, and a
bed that was already occupied.

Next morning about sunrise, I gladly mounted my horse; and without
entering Tariffa we skirted the walls, and struck into the road to
Algesiras. This is one of the most charming rides I have seen in any
part of Spain: it is a mountain road, abounding in the finest mountain
prospects; sometimes climbing to a great elevation, and sometimes
descending into deep valleys, and now and then disclosing magnificent
views over the sea. The coast of great part of Andalusia and of Granada,
is of a curious configuration: an infinite succession of conical hills,
rising one above another, decline backward from the sea, forming
altogether an elevated chain of mountains, from three thousand to five
thousand feet in height; the road, therefore, which winds among these,
necessarily conducts the traveller to never ending variety of prospect;
and this variety I fully enjoyed for the first time, in travelling
between Tariffa and Algesiras. At the highest point which the road
traversed, the view might be called sublime: it looked down into the
sea, which seemed like a majestic river flowing between gigantic
mountains; one of its banks being the mountain below me, which appeared
to dip into the water--the other, the Barbary coast, stretching away in
bold outline, and forming, directly opposite, that high and frowning
promontory, which is the southern boundary of the Streights of
Gibraltar.

From this point, the road descended into a deep and highly picturesque
valley, crossing a fine clear torrent, and then ascending through a
forest of aged cork trees. Here the air was filled with the perfume of
aromatic plants, particularly the balm of Gilead, which grew every where
around; and I also noticed abundance of rosemary, sweet marjorum, and
many medicinal plants, of whose names I am ignorant, although I had no
difficulty in recognizing their smells.

From the next elevation, I obtained the first view of Gibraltar,--an
object, that even if deprived of its localities, would possess an
interest exclusively its own; for it is impossible that an Englishman
travelling across the Peninsula, and first descrying this tower of
strength rising between Africa and Europe, should not feel that he is an
Englishman. Far from country and home, home lies before him; and he is
not too prejudiced a man, who, in a moment like this, feels that there
is a peculiar charm in an English voice, and puts spurs to his horse
that he may the sooner hear its music. I stopped a few moments, however,
upon the elevation, to enjoy the prospect: the calm, sun-shiny bay of
Algesiras, lay below,--the blue bosom of the water chequered with the
many vessels and their shadows; the rock of Gibraltar, part in sunshine,
part in shade, rising out of the other side of the bay. Beyond the
tongue of land that connected Gibraltar with the coast of Spain, were
seen the lofty Sierras of Granada; while beyond the Streights, the
horizon was bounded by the mountains of Morocco. But the pure air of
the mountains had disposed me for breakfast, and I made haste to reach
Algesiras, where I found a good inn and tolerable coffee.

My muleteer having no passport for Gibraltar, he of course could not
pass the Spanish lines, and I was therefore obliged to find another
conveyance for Gibraltar; and while inquiries were making for horses, I
took the opportunity of strolling through the town.

Algesiras is charmingly situated at the foot of mountains, upon a little
slope; and the sea washes the houses. The ruins of the ancient citadel,
within which the Moors continued to defend themselves when they were
driven from the town, are still visible. Just opposite to the town, and
not a quarter of a mile from the shore, is the little island of Palomas;
it is fortified, and commands the town, and the approach on that side.
When I walked down to the harbour, I found the packet-boat for Ceuta
getting under weigh. Ceuta, a Spanish possession on the African coast,
is five leagues from Algesiras; and a packet sails twice every week: the
passage seldom exceeds five or six hours. The wind was fair, and I was
almost tempted to step into the boat, which would carry me to Africa to
dinner. But Ceuta, I believe, is an uninteresting spot; and if one be
desirous of visiting Africa, it is better to go to Tangiers, to which
there are constant opportunities from Gibraltar.

It was upon Algesiras that an attempt had been meditated by a small body
of refugees, and others,--chiefly from Ceuta,--collected at Gibraltar;
it was fortunate for them that the intention was discovered, because any
descent upon Algesiras could only have been followed by their
destruction. There was not the slightest truth in any of the reports
which were current in other countries, respecting risings in different
parts of the southern provinces. No attempt was made to disturb the
government in any part of Andalusia, nor with the exception of the
scheme I have just noticed, is it believed that any was meditated.

I left Algesiras before noon, and rode within water mark round the bay
towards Gibraltar. Across the bay, it is not a league from Algesiras to
Gibraltar, but round by the tongue of land, it is between two and three
leagues; no one however can regret the distance, for the views on every
side are magnificent; and the sands, when the tide is a little back, are
spacious and dry. After crossing two wide creeks by ferries, I found
myself on English, rather than on Spanish ground; for though still
within the Spanish lines, I met numerous parties of English officers and
ladies on horseback; and having passed the Spanish sentinels, and the
neutral ground, which is but very limited, I was in the British
dominions.




CHAPTER XVI.

GIBRALTAR. MALAGA.

     Picture of the Street Population of Gibraltar; the Construction of
     Houses favourable to Epidemic; Scenery, union of Nature and Art;
     the _Agremens_ of Gibraltar as a Military Station; high Prices in
     Gibraltar; the Alameda; the Excavations; Walk to the Summit; the
     Monkeys; Magnificent View; Sunday in Gibraltar; Trade; the
     Epidemic; Extortion at the Passport Office; Voyage to Malaga; View
     of the City from the Sea; a strange Usage; Pictures of Idleness;
     facility of Living in Malaga; Bad Character of the Population; an
     Anecdote; Public Edifices; Society; Morals; Italian Opera; curious
     Scenes; a perilous Situation; the Wines of Malaga; Produce, and
     Export of Wines; Malaga Sherry; Export of Fruits; the Raisins of
     Malaga; Trade with England; Excursions in the Neighbourhood;
     Water-Coolers; Prices of Provisions.


To some, it may almost appear waste of words, to speak of
Gibraltar,--Gibraltar, a British possession that every body has heard
of, and where there are always five or six British regiments; and yet,
if I be at all entitled to judge of others, by my own ignorance of
Gibraltar before I visited it, I suspect the rock of Gibraltar is but
very imperfectly known to those who have never passed the Streights.

When I threw open the window of the hotel, and looked out upon the
street, it seemed as if I had been suddenly transported to England. I
saw English houses, English names upon the corners of the streets,
English names over the shops, English faces, English dresses. But a more
narrow inspection of the population, destroys the illusion; for it is of
so motley a character, that if we can suppose one to be carried to
Gibraltar, without having been informed of his destination, he would be
utterly at a loss to imagine in what corner of the world he had been set
down. That gentleman sauntering down the street in a surtout and black
neckcloth, is an Englishman; his countenance and his dress, alike decide
his country: the two ladies who follow, are Spanish; the light step, and
graceful gait, would be sufficient to determine this; but the mantilla
and the fan, put it beyond doubt: those two on horseback, are a British
officer and an English lady; the horse and the scarlet uniform fix the
character of the one,--and as for the other, the bright sunny face, and
auburn ringlets, are sufficient, without the evidence of the riding
habit. The three women crossing the street, are neither English nor
Spanish; their scarlet cloaks, trimmed with black velvet, distinguish
them as Gibraltar women; or they might be Genoese. These men with
turbans, ample trowsers, and crimson girdles, standing in a group under
the piazzas, are Moors, the former masters of Spain: and these with bare
legs, and sandals, and black caps and beards, sitting in the streets,
are Barbary Jews, the common porters of Gibraltar: and that, is an
English trading captain, easily known any where: and who can mistake the
British tar, with his jacket and trowsers, and rolling walk, and bluff
countenance--or the Spanish muleteer, the Andalusian, with his dark eye,
and bizarre dress--or the kilted soldier, his sinewy limbs, and rough
face, bearing the complexion of Scotch winds, and Highland hills? All
this is seen in less than two minutes from the window of Griffiths
hotel.

Nothing can be worse judged than the manner in which the town of
Gibraltar is built; the houses are constructed for the latitude of
England in place of the latitude of Africa. It is not to be wondered at,
that when epidemics find their way to Gibraltar, their progress should
be irresistible; for not one demand of a hot climate has been complied
with: here are no patios, and fountains, and open galleries, admitting a
free circulation of air, as in Seville; all is closely boxed up, as if
for the climate of England; closed doors, narrow passages, and narrow
stairs, keep out the fresh, and keep in the foul air. In place of the
floors being of brick, or Valencia tiles, they are of wood; the rooms
are small; the windows, not folding, lightly closed, and opening upon
airy balconies, but constructed upon the most approved air-excluding
plan; and the bedrooms carpeted, and the beds curtained. The effects of
all this may easily be imagined,--the spread of disease is powerfully
assisted by filthiness, and by impure and stagnant air; and,
accordingly, no where in Europe have the ravages of the plague been so
fearful as in Gibraltar. The streets and houses are incapable of
alteration; and therefore the only remedy would be, gradually to pull
down the houses, and to replace them with others better fitted to the
climate.

The morning after my arrival in Gibraltar, I walked out, with some
curiosity, to see more of a spot of which I had heard so much. After
leaving the town, the road led me towards the south-west, gradually
mounting the rock, and disclosing novel and entrancing views below,
while it conducted me through most charming scenes. I was every where
struck with the results of industry, and of art--not supplanting nature,
but adding its embellishments where her hand had already traced the
outline. Wherever a nook in the rocks was covered with a little soil, it
bore evidence of the labour that had been bestowed upon it; upon every
little eminence, beautiful cottages, the quarters of the officers, or
the country houses of the merchants, were seen surrounded by pretty
gardens; and shaded, on one side perhaps by a majestic rock, on the
other by orange trees and acacias. On both sides of the road, luxuriant
hedges of geranium in flower, captivated more senses than one; and the
rocks, too, were covered with its scarlet and lilac blossoms. The road
which I pursued looked down upon the Alameda, which I had not then
visited, but which looked most captivating from above; I saw it
sprinkled with fig trees, with their broad beautiful leaves and
fantastic trunks--and acacias, with their little yellow tufts so full of
fragrance--and orange trees, speckled thick with the bright fruit,
embowered in its green alcove. It was a charming prospect to look down
upon the Alameda, and across to the Spanish main, over the calm bay--and
up to the gigantic rocks, covered with their natural foliage, and
sheltering the pretty villas that nestled under them. In about an hour
and a half, I reached the south-west point, after passing numerous
ranges of fine barracks; here the rock dips perpendicularly into the
sea; and from this point, the long bold line of the African coast is
seen stretching away to the west and south. The whole rock of Gibraltar
is intersected by roads, broad and smooth, all adapted for horse
exercise, and most of them for carriages. In fact, Gibraltar is not the
banishment some people suppose; and as military quarters, it possesses
many more _agremens_ than any English provincial town can boast. There
is no want of society in Gibraltar, for the military are always
sufficiently numerous to form society among themselves; and that fine
old gentleman, Sir George Don,[A] is just such a man as ought to be
governor of Gibraltar, because he understands hospitality, and brings
the inhabitants together. Every body in Gibraltar is bent upon
amusement: there are balls and concerts, and private parties, and an
excellent library and a reading room, where I saw the English magazines
fifteen days after they were published in London. Add to all these
agremens, charming rides on the fine sands within the Spanish lines;
walks in the Alameda, where there are parades and military music every
day; boating in the bay; and excursions to Algesiras, Ceuta, and
Tangiers; and news from England by the steam-packet every month,--and
it will be admitted that Gibraltar is not a place of military
banishment. One drawback Gibraltar indeed possesses,--the expense of
living. Almost every article of subsistence is brought from the Spanish
main, from Africa, or from England; and every thing is therefore
expensive: house-rent, especially, is exorbitantly high; the rent of a
moderately sized house, ranging from 200_l._ to 400_l._ per annum. It is
probable, however, that the withdrawal of business and population from
Gibraltar to Cadiz--the result of the latter place having been made a
free port--will affect a reduction in the value of property, and in the
amount of house-rent. Clothing is an exception to the dearness of every
thing in Gibraltar: all goods of foreign manufacture are of course to be
bought of the regular trader, in a free port, at the same price as in
the country where they are manufactured, with only the addition of
freight, and the profit of the dealer; but all such articles find their
way by some means into the hands of the Jews; and at the public sales
which are held in the market-place almost daily, every thing may be
bought far below prime cost.--I saw fine broad cloth sold at a dollar a
yard.

The Alameda of Gibraltar is truly a little paradise; and whenever I left
the inn, I found myself on the road to this delightful retreat. Along
the whole of the north side of Gibraltar, there is a level, or nearly
level stripe, between the base of the rock and the sea; this stripe
varies in breadth, from a quarter, to perhaps two-thirds of a mile; the
east end of it is occupied by the town, and the west end by the Alameda.
This delightful promenade is about half a mile long; it is intersected
by innumerable walks, and affords, besides its own attractions, ever
changing and delightful views of the bay, the rock, the mainland, and
the town. The fences are entirely of geranium of every variety; and of a
size, such as would be thought worthy of a pilgrimage in England. The
spaces between the walks, are thickets of geranium, and of various
flowering and odoriferous plants, seen in the English green-house; and
fig trees, silver elms, acacias, and orange trees, are thickly scattered
over this little paradise. The Alameda of Gibraltar would be beautiful
any where--even if surrounded by a desert; but how much more beautiful,
bounded on one side by a rock fifteen hundred feet high, and on the
other, by a placid bay of the Mediterranean!

But it is the excavations in the rock that are always spoken of as the
wonder of Gibraltar. I of course visited these, and found them all, and
more than all, that I had expected. The whole interior of the solid rock
has been hewn, blasted, and formed into galleries, of immense
extent,--wide enough for a carriage,--and leaving, every ten or twelve
yards, openings at which cannon are placed, commanding the sea or the
land approach to the rock. There are two galleries, one over the other,
and the extent of both is between two and three miles. At one point in
the highest gallery, a small opening leads to a projecting part of the
rock, at the side of the great precipice of fifteen hundred feet, facing
the north-east. I found every niche in the rock covered with white
narcissus,--and beautiful looked these gentle flowers, standing in
little companies, in spots where the hand of man could never reach, nor
the foot of the goat ever stray: but I made a capture of one cluster,
which nodded upon a little shelf within my reach; they smelt quite as
sweet as the garden narcissus; and there were no fewer than eight
flowers upon one stalk.

After leaving the galleries, I wished to ascend to the highest point of
the rock; but a sentry stopped me, telling me I could not be permitted
to go higher, without an order from the governor. But the day being
transcendantly beautiful, and, resolved upon a days ramble, I got out
of the sentinels sight, and leaving the road, scrambled in a direct
line towards the eastern point. Turning the corner of the declivities
fronting the east, I suddenly found myself in the neighbourhood of
eleven monkeys; they did not perceive me at first, nor, when they did,
was there any great alarm manifested among them. They turned round, sat
up, and looked at me; and after a few moments scrutiny, they wheeled
about, and scampered away, chattering, and looking behind them; and
disappeared round some projecting rocks. The monkeys are always to be
found on the side of the rock opposite to that upon which the wind
blows: they constantly shift their quarters with the wind.

It was a laborious ascent to reach the south-eastern summit of the rock,
which is one thousand five hundred and ninety-five feet above the
Mediterranean; but amply was the labour repaid: for my eye never
embraced a more magnificent prospect. Looking towards the east, the bold
coast of Granada stretched in a wide curve, ending in the dim mountains
that lie around Malaga. Withdrawing the eye from the Spanish coast, it
wandered over the calm Mediterranean, streaked like a summer lake, and
baring its trembling bosom to the sunbeams. Farther to the south, was
seen an indistinct line, stretching eastward; this was the coast of
Africa: and towards the west, this line grew more distinct, till, at
scarce three leagues across, it terminated in the dark high mountain of
Barbary--one of the Pillars of Hercules. Turning towards the north, lay
in unruffled tranquillity, the bay that separates Gibraltar from the
Spanish Main. The vessels at anchor were mirrored below; many little
boats were rowing about; and several mysticos and scampiavas had hung
out their enormous sails, to woo the light airs that came, and died upon
the summer sea. Beyond the bay, was the coast of Andalusia, seemingly
within a gun-shot; the town of Algesiras nestling at the head of the
bay, and in the hollow of the mountains that rose behind, dappled with
the lights and shadows that the few wandering clouds cast upon their
valleys and acclivities. Nor was the gigantic rock itself a picture of
no importance in this glorious view: its rugged and fearful precipices,
and deep ravines--a milk-white goat here and there standing upon a giddy
point--the sentinels far below, their arms glittering in the
sunshine--the verdure that covered the lower declivities, and fringed
the bay--these completed the picture: a picture that I think can never
pass from my memory.

One of the days I spent at Gibraltar was a Sunday. This day is there
observed with great strictness: prayers are read to the troops on
parade, and also in the government house. But it is a most
unaccountable fact, that there should be no place of public worship for
the large Protestant English population of this British possession: this
is bitterly complained of. Hundreds among the troops would gladly attend
church, if there was a church to attend; and many, rather than go to no
temple at all, frequent the Catholic chapel. A Protestant church was
begun some time ago, but want of funds has prevented its completion. All
this reflects little credit upon those who have the management of such
matters.

Gibraltar is a fallen and falling place, as a place of commerce; and
there is no prospect of any revival. In speaking of Cadiz, I have
already said that the whole, or almost the whole licit and illicit trade
of Gibraltar, has been transferred to that city. The loss of the Cadiz
market alone, which took up extensively the articles which were received
into the free port of Gibraltar, might easily account for its decline.
But there is still another cause for the decline of Gibraltar; a cause
that might probably have been of itself sufficient to determine the ruin
of this settlement, and which has, at all events, materially hastened
it: I allude to the epidemic. Since the last terrible visitation of this
kind, there has been a general feeling of insecurity: many, soon
afterwards, removed their establishments elsewhere; and others are
ready, upon the first rumour of disease, to quit a spot where life is
held by so precarious a tenure.

Every one knows the history of Gibraltar. Before the establishment of
the Moorish empire in Spain, Gibraltar was called Calpe; under the Moors
it bore the name of Gibel-Tarif, and subsequently of Gibraltar. The
importance attached to Gibraltar during the last years of the Moorish
empire, has lately been made better known to us by that delightful work,
the Chronicles of the Conquest of Granada. In the year 1704, Gibraltar
was taken by the combined English and Dutch fleets under Sir George
Rooke; and in 1713 it was confirmed to England by the peace of Utrecht.
The only important attempt to wrest Gibraltar from the English was made
in 1782, by the combined fleets of France and Spain; but the attempt
proved abortive, and the rock of Gibraltar may now be considered
inseparably united to the British empire[B].

After having spent some pleasant days at Gibraltar, I inquired
respecting conveyances to Malaga. I learnt that it was a two days
journey on mule back; and that the character of the country between
Gibraltar and Malaga, was precisely the same as that which I had
travelled from Cadiz. Tempted the same afternoon by a fine breeze from
the west, and by an offer of a passage in a Spanish mystico, which the
captain assured me would sail at six next morning, and would be in
Malaga the same evening, I got all ready,--took out my passport and a
bill of health, and went to bed in the hope of sleeping next night in
Malaga. I gladly avail myself of this opportunity of mentioning the
unjustifiable exactions of the public offices in this British
possession. Throughout the whole of Spain, more than two pecetas (1_s._
8_d._) had never been demanded at any passport office; but at Gibraltar,
where it is difficult to understand upon what principle an English
subject should require permission of the English authorities to visit
Malaga,--I was charged a dollar. As well might an Englishman about to
visit Calais, be obliged to have the permission of Sir Richard Birnie.
At all events, the charge is extravagant, and therefore unjust; the
petty officer who signs his name at Gibraltar, and pockets the crown, is
not, like a consul in a foreign port, the representative of the British
government, and obliged to spend all, or more than all, that he
receives. In Gibraltar the governor is the representative of the
government; and the demand of a dollar from every Englishman who passes
through Gibraltar, can only be regarded as a robbery of British subjects
to support a sinecurist.

Looking from my window, about five next morning, I saw with dismay, that
the wind had increased almost to a storm, still from the west, but too
violent to allow any vessel to beat out of the bay; for it is a great
difficulty attending the navigation from Gibraltar, that the most
favourable wind for the Levant, is the most adverse for carrying a
vessel out of the bay. I had made up my mind to bear the delay, and be
contented with reading the English newspapers, and with an English
dinner in the hotel, when the master of the mystico sent to inform me
that the wind had so much abated as to permit him to beat out, and that
he was on the point of sailing. I immediately ran down to the harbour,
hired a boat, and was just in time to catch the mystico upon one of its
tacks. The vessel had been obliged to leave the harbour, because, after
gun-fire at five oclock, the gates and harbour are shut, and nothing is
permitted to pass out or in.

We beat out of the bay with some difficulty;--a brilliant sun-set flamed
upon the rock of Gibraltar,--and just as the sun sunk behind the
mountains of Barbary, we doubled Point Europa,--and lying to our course,
went swiftly through the water. The current alone would carry a vessel
from Gibraltar to Malaga, for it constantly sets in through the
Streights into the Mediterranean, a fact that has puzzled both
navigators and philosophers: but with a strong westerly breeze, the
doubt was not, whether we should reach Malaga by day-break, but whether
we might not pass it during the night; for the masters of these Spanish
boats are not the most scientific of navigators. I sat upon deck till
the line of coast became invisible, and then lay down on the lee side,
where I slept till day-break; and looking up, I found we were traversing
the bay of Malaga, and that we should be in the harbour in less than an
hour. Malaga is an imposing object from the sea: it stands in the centre
of a wide bay, flanked and backed by lofty mountains; and by the
picturesque ruins of its ancient fortifications and castle, which cover
the hill that rises immediately to the east, and seem, from their great
extent, like the remains of a former city. When we had cast anchor, the
health-boat rowed out to us: fortunately quarantine had lately been
removed; and after a slight examination of luggage, I was permitted to
go on shore; and on the recommendation of the British consul, I
established myself in the Fonda de los tres Reyes.

Malaga I found an interesting, agreeable, and hospitable city; and I
recollect with pleasure the time I spent there. After breakfasting, and
waiting upon his Britannic majestys consul, Mr. Mark, whose attentions
I have great pleasure in acknowledging, I committed myself to chance,
and perambulated the city. One of the first places I happened to enter,
was the market, where I was attracted by the singularity of a usage
which I never remarked elsewhere. Various stalls were appropriated to
the sale of poultry; but these were not exposed whole;--fowls, ducks,
partridges, and various other birds, were cut up: here was a row of
legs,--there, of wings, or breasts,--these were sold separately; and I
saw no lack of purchasers. The general aspect of the population of
Malaga, I found even more Moorish than that of Seville; and it afforded
innumerable admirable pictures of idleness. Many of the market people
were seated on the earth on circular mats, and the stools in general use
were still lower than in Seville; but hundreds appeared to be doing
nothing: groups sat upon the ground, their backs against the wall of
some house or convent; others lay upon the steps at the entrance of the
churches; and many sauntered listlessly to and fro in the sun, which at
this season was rather coveted than shunned. All these idlers were
wrapped up in their brown cloaks,--most of them ragged and patched,--and
the greater number were regaling themselves with delicious melons, which
they leisurely and indolently cut up with their long clasp knives--so
often in Malaga put to less innocent purposes. Malaga is noted for its
idle and bad population; a character which I believe it deservedly
maintains, and which results chiefly from the facility with which the
wants of life are supplied. A good melon may often be purchased for two
or three quartos. A quartillo of wine (something more than a bottle)
costs no more. A little barrel of anchovies may be purchased for two
reals (4_d._); and if so, the fresh sardia must be to be had at a
price that will put a meal within the reach of any one who is possessed
of a quarto (less than a farthing). These luxuries, indeed, require a
few quartos to obtain them; and if begging be not sufficient for this,
the _mala gente_ of Malaga (for this is the expression commonly applied
to its population) are at no loss to find the quartos in some other
way. The whole idle population of Malaga are thieves: and in so degraded
a state is public justice in this city, that crimes of a far darker hue
than theft, pass unpunished; because, to take notice of them, would be
to court the worst effects of revenge. In another chapter I have
illustrated, by an example, the perfect security with which, in Malaga,
a man may obey the very worst passions. A woman who dares prosecute the
murderer of her husband, speedily receives a private intimation that
effectually silences her; and it has been not uncommon, for money to be
put into the hands of an _escrivano_ previous to the commission of a
murder, in order to ensure the services and protection of a person so
necessary to one who meditates crime. I will relate a trifling
circumstance that occurred while I was at Malaga, in corroboration of
what I have been saying.

One night, Mr. F., a most respectable merchant of the town, while on his
way home, was stopped and robbed. The man who committed the robbery was
very well known to the gentleman whom he robbed: he was a waterman,
owning a boat, and plying betwixt the pier and the vessels. Next
morning, Mr. F. having occasion to go out to a vessel, walked down to
the pier, and was stepping into a boat, when another man offered his
services; Mr. F., without turning to look at the man who spoke, said
this was his ordinary boatman, and he always employed men whom he knew.
What, sir, said the other, lifting his hat above his brow, dont you
know me? Mr. F. turned round, and saw the man who had robbed him the
night before; and yet, to prosecute a man, who thus in open day claimed
the recollection of the person he had robbed, would be a hazard that no
prudent inhabitant of Malaga dare encounter.

I found the pictures presented by the street population of Malaga
interesting, because they were novel; but the streets themselves
presented little attraction. The only handsome part of the town is the
Alameda; the other parts present a labyrinth of narrow, intricate
streets, almost wholly inhabited by the tradespeople, or by a low
population; but the buildings that line both sides of the Alameda are
magnificent, and the interior of many of these houses, I found more
splendid than any thing I had yet seen in Spain. The public buildings
are but indifferent; with the exception of the cathedral, which is
greatly admired by the people of Malaga; but which, after having seen
those of Toledo and Seville, possesses but little attraction. Like the
cathedral of Cadiz, it is not finished; it was intended to be surmounted
by six towers, but only one of these has been erected. There are no
pictures in the cathedral, nor are there any worthy of notice in the
other churches or convents of the city.

The state of society in Malaga, does not greatly differ from that of the
other cities in the south of Spain; but there is one strange peculiarity
in Malaga society, that cannot but forcibly strike a stranger: this is,
the extraordinary familiarity of servants. I have frequently seen
servants at table, join in conversation with the family: a female
servant while receiving orders, always sits down in the company of her
mistress; and, upon one occasion, while a game at _basto_ was playing,
I saw a servant who had brought refreshments, walk forward to the table,
place his two _pecetas_ upon it, retire, and wait at a little distance
to know the fate of his stake.

With respect to morals, I might repeat what I have said of Cadiz: I may
merely add, that a Spanish lady of Malaga, married to a highly
respectable Scotch merchant and consul, and who had resided all her days
there, told me that she did not know one Spanish woman in Malaga who had
always led a virtuous life. So universal is the system of gallantry in
Malaga, that a gentleman is not designated as seor so and so, but
invariably as the _cortejo_ of this or that seora. In another respect,
too, the low state of morals is shewn: I allude to the great laxity of
female conversation. I was informed by the English mother of three
grown-up daughters, that it was impossible to allow them to keep company
with either married or unmarried Spanish women; and this I can very well
believe, judging by the tone of conversation to which I have myself been
witness.

Last autumn, Malaga supported an Italian opera; at which I was twice
present. Upon one of these occasions, La Gaza Ladra was performed, and
not ill performed. The Prima Donna was a sister of Malibran,--a very
inferior singer to her celebrated relative, but by no means despicable,
and she was well supported both in the vocal parts and by the orchestra.
The theatre was crowded, and the dresses of the ladies might be called
splendid. The love of dress is carried to a great length in Malaga. A
young lady, fifteen years of age, who was of the same party with myself
at the opera, told me that she had given twenty dollars for her fan; and
another young person, the daughter of a small tradesman in Malaga, told
me, when I admired her comb, that it had cost fourteen dollars. It was a
curious spectacle in leaving the theatre, to see some hundreds of
servants with lanterns waiting in the street. Gentlemen and ladies, have
alike their lantern to light them home. To attempt the dark narrow
streets of Malaga without this accompaniment, would be to tempt the
_mala gente_, and certainly to encounter great and unnecessary risk. It
was a very unseasonable interruption, just when every servant had
discovered his master, and when the line of march had begun, to hear the
little bell that announced the approach of the _host_. All the lights
were suddenly arrested in their progress, and the procession passed
through an avenue of kneelers, illuminated by the hundreds of lanterns
that were placed upon the ground,--the spectacle was undoubtedly
picturesque.

I consider myself to have had rather a narrow escape while at Malaga, in
a visit which I made to the ruins of the castle. The ruins of the
Moorish fortifications are of extraordinary extent; they reach from the
city to the summit of the hill that flanks it to the east,--a distance
not much less than a mile; and desirous of inspecting the ruins, as well
as of enjoying the views which I had no doubt were to be enjoyed from
the heights, I devoted an afternoon to this walk. As I ascended,
occasional gaps in the ruins discovered charming glimpses over the city,
the sea, and the mountains; and at one spot, where a half-fallen spiral
staircase leads to the summit of a round tower, whose ruins flank the
wall,--the whole magnificence of the prospect burst upon me. The city,
washed by the Mediterranean,--the fertile plain to the north of Malaga,
covered with gardens and orangeries, and sprinkled with villages and
convents, and the fine range of magnificent and curiously broken
mountains that environ that little plain;--the situation of Malaga
leaves nothing to desire. I had not yet ascended above half way,--and
the higher up, the more extensive are the ruins; the lower part being
occupied by fortifications, but the upper half of the hill being covered
with the remains of the castle. Soon after leaving the tower, I passed
three ruffian-looking men sitting under the wall playing cards; and
perhaps prudence ought to have whispered to me to return; but an
Englishman with difficulty persuades himself of the possibility of
violence in day-light; and the sun being above the horizon, I continued
my walk. Higher up, I found myself entirely enclosed among the ruins;
and having gone so far, and believing that I could be at no great
distance from the summit, I resolved not to return by the same road, but
to find some path that might lead me down the other side of the hill,
either towards the sea or the back of the city. I therefore continued
threading my way among the ruins. I had reached a very solitary spot,
entirely shut in by massive walls, when, passing within ten or twelve
yards of a low archway, scarcely two feet above the ground, I chanced to
turn my eye in that direction, and was startled by seeing the dark
countenances of two men peering from the mouth of it, their bodies being
concealed by the gloom within. All that I had heard and knew of the
character of the lowest class in Malaga, suddenly recurred to my mind; I
felt the full danger of my situation, and walking a few wide paces
farther, as if I had not observed them, till a fragment of the ruin was
fortunately intercepted between me and the arch, I sprung forward with
no tardy step; but not before a stealthy glance had shewn me the figure
of one man already half way between the arch and myself, and another on
the point of emerging from his lurking place. I have not the smallest
doubt, that if these men had been aware of my approach, or if, in the
hurry of the moment, I had mistaken my path among the ruins, or found
no outlet, I should never have returned to write this volume:
fortunately, however, I had not run more than twenty yards, when a gap
in the wall shewed me the open country below, and the next moment I had
passed through it, and dropped into a small olive plantation. I made
what haste I could, down the hill to the city; and when I related the
circumstance that had taken place, I was told I had been guilty of an
imprudence that no one acquainted with Malaga would have ventured upon;
that robbery, and murder also, had been perpetrated among these ruins;
and that I owed my escape to nothing but the lucky accident of finding a
speedy exit.

When we think of Malaga, it is generally in connexion with its wines;
which, although not so much in vogue in England as in other times, yet
enjoy a high reputation, and along with its fruits, form the distinction
and the wealth of Malaga. I shall therefore make no apology for
occupying a few pages with some details respecting the wines and fruits
of this most southern city of the continent of Europe.

The wines of Malaga are of two sorts, sweet, and dry; and of the former
of these, there are four kinds. First, The common Malaga, known and
exported under that name. In this wine there is a certain proportion of
boiled wine, which is allowed to burn, and which communicates a slightly
burnt taste to the Malaga. The grape from which this wine is made, is
a white grape, and every butt of Malaga contains no less than eleven
gallons of brandy. Secondly, Mountain. This wine is made from the same
grape as the other, and like the other, contains colouring matter, and
brandy; the only difference is, that for mountain, the grape is
allowed to become riper. Thirdly, lagrimas, the richest and finest of
the sweet wines of Malaga; the name of which almost explains the manner
in which it is made. It is the droppings of the ripe grape hung up, and
is obtained without the application of pressure.

The dry wine of Malaga is produced from the same grape as the sweet
wine, but pressed when greener: in this wine there is an eighth-part
more of brandy than in the sweet wine; no less than one twelfth part of
the dry Malaga being brandy.

The whole produce of the Malaga vineyards is estimated at from
thirty-five to forty thousand butts, but owing to the increasing stock
of old wine in the cellars, it is impossible to be precise in this
calculation. The export of all the Malaga wines may be stated at about
twenty-seven thousand butts. The principal market is the United States,
and the States of South America; and to these countries, the export is
rather upon the increase. The average price of the wines shipped from
Malaga, does not exceed thirty-five dollars per butt; but wines are
occasionally exported at so high a price as one hundred and seventy
dollars. Many attempts have been made at Malaga to produce sherry, but
not with perfect success. The Xeres grape has been reared at Malaga,
upon a soil very similar to its native soil; but the merchants of Malaga
have not ventured to enter the wine for export. For my own part, judging
from a sample of wine which I tasted at the warehouse of Messrs. W. &
G. Read, I should say that the experiment had succeeded; and that the
sherry made at Malaga, might be introduced into the English market as
sherry; and from its great cheapness, it could not fail to command a
sale. One reason of the very low price of the wines of Malaga, is to be
found in the cheapness of labour: field labour is only two and a half
reals a day (4_d._). In the fruit and vintage time it is about double.

Next to its wines, the chief export of Malaga is fruit; consisting of
raisins, almonds, grapes, figs, and lemons: but of these, raisins are
the principal export. I have before me, a note of the exports of Malaga
for the months of September and October, in the year 1830--the chief,
though not the sole exporting months,--and I find, that during that
time, the export of raisins amounted to two hundred and sixty-eight
thousand, eight hundred and forty-five boxes; and thirty-one thousand,
nine hundred and sixteen smaller packages. Of this quantity, one hundred
and twenty-five thousand, three hundred and thirty-four boxes were
entered for the United States; forty-five thousand, five hundred and
thirteen for England; the remaining quantity being for France, the West
Indies, the Spanish ports, South America, and Holland.

The raisins exported from Malaga are of three kinds; the muscatel, the
bloom, or sun raisin, and lexias. The muscatel raisin of Malaga, is the
finest in the world. In the preparation of this raisin, no art is used;
the grape is merely placed in the sun, and frequently turned. The bloom,
or sun raisin, is a different grape from the muscatel; but the process
of preparing it is the same: like the other, it is merely sun-dried. The
lexias acquire this name from the liquor in which they are dipped, and
which is composed of water, ashes, and oil: these, after being dipped,
are also dried in the sun. All muscatel raisins are exported in boxes,
and also a part of the bloom raisins. In the year 1829, the number of
boxes of muscatel and bloom raisins exported, was three hundred and
twenty thousand; each box containing twenty-five lbs.--eight millions of
lbs. in all. This quantity is independent of the export of bloom raisins
in casks; and of lexias, the annual export of which, does not exceed
thirty thousand arrobas. The export of raisins to England has fallen
off; the export to America has constantly increased. In the year 1824,
seventy-five ships cleared from the port of Malaga, for England, with
fruit. In 1830, up to the first of November, thirty-four vessels had
cleared out. It is supposed, that Cadiz having been made a free port,
will have the effect of increasing the export fruit trade of Malaga.
Owners are unwilling to send out vessels from England on ballast; and it
is probable, that many will carry out goods to Cadiz, and then proceed
to Malaga to take back a cargo, or part cargo of fruit.

Of the other fruits exported from Malaga, grapes, almonds, and lemons
are the most extensively exported. In the months of September and
October, 1830, eleven thousand six hundred and twelve jars of grapes
were sent to England; to America, six thousand four hundred and
twenty-nine; and to Russia one thousand six hundred and fifty. During
the same period of time, five thousand three hundred and thirty-five
arrobas of almonds (133,375 lbs.) were exported to England; and this
constituted nearly the whole export: and during these months also, there
were exported to England, three thousand seven hundred and fifty-nine
boxes of lemons; to Germany, four thousand two hundred and one boxes;
and to Russia, eight hundred and forty boxes. There is also a large
export of oil from Malaga: but the export for the latter part of 1830
would be no criterion of the average; because the Greenland whale
fishery having failed, extensive orders for olive oil had been received
from England. Eight hundred and twenty-seven pipes of oil had been
exported for the British market during the above months.

The general trade between England and Malaga is on the decline: that
with both the Americas is increasing, especially in wines. The number of
British vessels which entered the port of Malaga in 1827, I find, from
an official note furnished by the British consul, to have been one
hundred and four; in 1828, one hundred and twenty-six; in 1829, one
hundred and five; in 1830, up to the 1st of November, eighty-three,
exclusive of the small Gibraltar vessels. The number of American
vessels entering in 1829, was fifty-five; but the average tonnage of the
Americans being one hundred and seventy-five tons, and that of the
English vessels not exceeding one hundred, the whole American is nearly
equal to the whole of the English trade.

Whilst I remained in Malaga, my time was very agreeably employed; the
weather was sufficiently cool to allow horse and foot exercise; and the
neighbourhood of Malaga affords many charming excursions: these
pleasantly filled up the mornings; while a stroll on the sea shore, the
many hospitalities of English, American, and Spanish families, and the
theatre or opera, agreeably occupied the evening. Among my excursions in
the neighbourhood, one was made to the convent of Victoria, beautifully
placed in a hollow of the neighbouring mountains, surrounded by charming
gardens, where the most delicious fruits vie with each other in tempting
the palate. Among the autumnal fruits of the south of Spain, they
particularly prize the granada, or pomegranate, on account of its real,
or salubrious qualities, especially in derangements of the bowels. North
of the Sierra Morena, the pomegranate is an indifferent fruit; but in
Andalusia and Granada, it arrives at perfection; and so full of juice is
a really fine and ripe pomegranate, that one measuring four inches in
diameter, may be compressed into the bulk of a nut.

In the neighbourhood of the convent of Victoria, the country people find
that useful clay, of which they make the vessels called _bucaros_, used
for cooling water. Without these, the inhabitant of these sultry shores
would be deprived of one of his most essential luxuries; for when the
hot winds prevail, water exposed to the air in these vessels, becomes
icy cold. This singular fact is to be explained by the porous nature of
these vessels, which allow the water to exude; and the hot wind blowing
upon the moist external surface, a rapid evaporation and consequent
cold, are produced.

From the same clay, there is an ingenious manufactory of little figures,
representing Spanish costume in the different provinces. These are in
great variety, and are executed with much truth and ability: indeed, I
have not seen, in any other country, any thing so excellent in its kind.
Nothing would have pleased me more, than to have carried a complete
assortment of them to England; but they are of so fragile a nature, that
they could scarcely have arrived at their destination without broken
limbs and noses.

I occupied another day with an excursion to the _Retiro_, the
country-seat of a noble family; but now in a state of dilapidation. The
situation of the old castle is, however, beyond conception
delightful,--nestling at the foot of the mountains, and almost bathed by
the transparent waves of the Mediterranean; and in the adjoining
gardens, every fruit-tree congenial to that glorious climate, flourishes
in unfading luxuriance. Every where in the neighbourhood of Malaga, the
acclivities not occupied by vines, are covered with the prickly pear,
which is cultivated chiefly for the sake of the cochineal which breeds
upon it: this valuable article of commerce has not, however, been yet
produced in so great abundance as to form an article of export.

Few of the useful productions of the globe are unsuitable to the climate
of some part of Spain. In the northern provinces, all the productions of
the temperate climates arrive at perfection; and in the most southern
parts, the climate is found sufficiently fine to ripen the produce of
the Indies. To the eastward of Malaga, a few leagues along the coast,
the sugar-cane is successfully cultivated: though this useful plant is
known to have been much more extensively grown in the time of the Moors
than now, which is evident, from the remains of their sugar-houses.
Still, however, the sugar-cane is a valuable produce, and is said to
supply a sugar scarcely inferior to that of the West Indies.

Malaga, like most of the other cities of Spain, has had various masters.
Built by the Phnicians, it was successively Carthagenian, Roman,
Gothic, and Moorish; and in the reign of Haly Abenhameth, was the seat
of empire. Ferdinand and Isabella succeeded in wresting Malaga from the
dominion of the Moors, in the year 1487.

Malaga was formerly much more populous than it is now, though, within
the last fifty years, the population has been again on the increase.
Anciently, it contained nearly a hundred thousand persons; in the middle
of the last century, the inhabitants were reduced to thirty thousand;
and at present, it is said to contain about forty-five thousand.

I have nothing more to add of Malaga, excepting the price of provisions.

Beef is ten quartos the pound, of sixteen ounces; mutton the same. Pork,
fourteen quartos. Eggs, two for six quartos--not much less than a penny
each. A fine fowl, seven reals; a chicken, three reals; a duck, fifteen
reals; a turkey, from twenty to thirty reals. The best bread, twelve
quartos. Excellent wine, two reals per bottle. Potatoes, the measure of
six pounds and a quarter, seven quartos, or about twopence. A barrel of
anchovies, two reals. A partridge, four reals. A rabbit, ten reals.
Fish, remarkably cheap and plentiful. Melons, grapes, pomegranates,
figs, and prickly pears, so cheap as scarcely to form an article of
expenditure.

Let it not be forgotten, that eight quartos are twopence farthing; and
that, in one franc French, there are four reals.




CHAPTER XVII.

JOURNEY FROM MALAGA TO GRANADA.--GRANADA.

     Different Routes to Granada; Ascent of the Malaga Mountains; an
     Anecdote illustrative of Spanish Morals; Picture of a Venta and its
     Inmates; Night Arrangements; beautiful situation of Loxa; the Venta
     de Casin; first View of Granada; Reflections; the Situation of
     Granada and its Vega; the Alhambra; St. Michaels Mount, and its
     Singularities; excavated Dwellings; View from the Mount;
     extraordinary Changes in Temperature; a Fire in Granada, and the
     curious means resorted to for extinguishing it; Superstition; the
     Cathedral; the Convents; the Archbishop; Husbandry in the Vega of
     Granada; State of Agriculture; the Duke of Wellingtons Estates;
     Effects of the Loss of the Colonies; the Paseos of Granada; the
     Population; the Market; Usages; the Italian Opera.


From Malaga to Granada, there are two roads; one by Velez Malaga, the
other by Loxa. The former of these roads lies a great part of the way
along the sea shore, and then turning to the left, leads through Alhama
to Granada. By sleeping at Velez Malaga the first night, and at Alhama
the second, tolerable accommodation may be had all the way to Granada.
The other road, on leaving Malaga, strikes at once into the heart of the
mountains, and leads to Granada by way of Loxa. By this road, it is
necessary to sleep at ventas of the very worst description,--for Loxa
does not make a convenient halting place,--and although neither of these
roads are safe from robbery, the latter is by far the most celebrated
for the crimes that have been committed upon it. I resolved to travel by
the Loxa road; chiefly, because the scenery upon it was reported to be
greatly more attractive than upon the road by Velez Malaga; and learning
that a gallera was about to leave Malaga for Granada by the road which I
had selected, I engaged a place in it, for which I paid two dollars and
a half,--a very moderate charge for so long a journey.

I took my seat in the gallera at seven in the morning, and found my
fellow travellers to consist of a middle-aged woman, the wife, as I
afterwards learned, of a respectable shopkeeper in Malaga: her
daughter, a sprightly, intelligent, and remarkably pretty girl of
nineteen, two years married to a wine grower of the neighbourhood: a
young woman of two or three and twenty, comely, and finely formed, on
her way to Granada on speculation,--for she was one of those unhappy
persons, whose temporary home depends upon the caprice of her temporary
master; and another woman, who travelled openly as the mistress of the
muleteer. Such was the company in the gallera.

Leaving Malaga, the road passes along the channel of a stream, and then
enters the rich and highly cultivated country that lies between Malaga
and the mountains, which we began to ascend, after travelling about
three quarters of a league. This is the most extraordinary ascent I ever
recollect to have seen: it is computed to be three leagues and a half,
upwards of fourteen miles English, from the point at which the road
enters the mountains, until it reaches the summit of the range; and in
all this distance there is not one yard of level ground, still less of
descent. I know of no mountain road in Switzerland more abounding in
magnificent scenery, or in varied and charming prospects, than this. The
formation of these mountains is singular: innumerable conical hills
cover the face of the range; and the road winding upward among these, is
one moment shut in among the mountains, and shut out from the
world,--the next, emerging from behind one of these little hills, it
traverses the front of the range, disclosing an illimitable prospect of
land and sea. This peculiarity in the formation of the mountain,
produces an infinite variety of views. Sometimes, when looking back
towards Malaga, nothing intercepts the view--the whole bay,--Malaga in
its centre,--the Moorish ruins,--the cathedral, and the cultivated
plain, are all spread below. At another point, only the city and the bay
are seen, the mountains shutting out all the rest; while still higher
up, even the city is hidden, and the sea appears to wash the base of the
mountains. The views too in the interior of the mountain are beautiful:
a deep valley is from time to time revealed,--the mountain slopes that
encompass it, covered with vines, and in its centre the house of the
vine-grower, surrounded by a belt of charming verdure, and half
embowered in a grove of orange trees.

As we ascended the mountains, we met a few travellers, and a
considerable number of muleteers and their trains, every one well armed
with guns, and some with swords also. Many crosses stood by the
way-side; and as I walked the most part of the way up the mountain, I
generally stopped to read the record; some of these were of sudden
death, and some of murder,--but of the latter I saw only one of very
recent date.

A curious circumstance, throwing some additional light upon the morals
of Malaga, occurred in the course of the morning. When we had ascended
about two-thirds of the mountain, a handsome young caballero, in the
richly-ornamented Andalusian dress, and mounted upon a fine powerful
horse, overtook the gallera, and accosted the middle-aged woman and her
young married daughter, in the language of an acquaintance. Soon after
he gave his horse in charge to the muleteers assistant, and took his
seat in the gallera, where he kept up a half-whispered conversation
with the younger lady: but the nature of the _liaison_ now became more
evident. The cortejo of this young wife, for such of course was his
character, asked her aloud whether she would not like to ride his horse
a little way? To which she at first replied no, and then yes; and the
muleteer having opportunely discovered a ladys saddle lying in the
bottom of the gallera, and contrived too for two persons, she was soon
seated upon the horse, which walked in front of the gallera, and the
caballero walked by her side; but the horse gained so fast upon the
gallera, that the party was soon out of sight, till, upon reaching a
point from which a higher reach of the zig-zag road was visible, the
lady and her cortejo were seen both mounted, and trotting forward; and
we saw no more of them till night, when we reached the venta, where we
found the young lady in bed, and the caballero sitting by her. Her
mother seemed quite satisfied with the arrangements of the day, and
offered no reproof either in word or in look. The same evening the
gallant set out on his return to Malaga.

After reaching the summit of the mountain, and following for a little
way a level road, we began to descend into a deep valley, clothed with
ilex and cork tree; and towards evening we passed under the hill, upon
which the town of Colmona is situated. Upon a small bridge at the foot
of the hill, a number of the inhabitants of the town were assembled,
some sitting upon the wall of the bridge, some playing cards, and some
lying on the ground; and a more ruffian-like sample of a towns
population, I do not recollect to have ever seen. After passing Colmona,
we continued to wind among low hills that seemed the outposts of more
lofty ranges,--gradually ascending, and approaching the Sierra. And
nearly two hours after dark, the gallera stopped at the gate of the
solitary venta, where it was necessary we should pass the night.

This venta may be taken as a fair specimen of travelling accommodation
in the southern and eastern provinces of Spain, in the year 1830.
Groping my way through a small court-yard, and a wide gateway, I found
myself in a long apartment; I do not know any word to express (a barn
on the ground-story), the floor earthen--the roof, a congregation of
beams and rafters--the walls, partly rough stone, as originally put
together; partly white-washed. The door, by which I had entered, was
nearly in the middle of the side wall, so that one-half of the apartment
lay to the right, and the other to the left. To the right, I saw a dim
file of mules stretching away into obscurity: on the left, at the
farther extremity of the apartment, a bright blaze from a fire kindled
on the floor, shewed me the way to the part appropriated to the human
guests! As I walked towards the fire, which was at a great distance, the
scene assumed a more picturesque and striking appearance: at a round
table not far from the fire, sat ten or twelve men, every one with his
little round Spanish hat and crimson girdle; and in every ones hand a
long clasp knife, with which he fished, from time to time, a huge piece
of meat from an enormous brown dish that stood smoking in the centre of
the table--diffusing around the usual fragrance of a Spanish stew, in
which the prominent ingredients are oil and garlic. Over the blazing
fire hung an iron apparatus, from which depended a large iron pot,
containing something worthy the attention of a brown-cheeked,
dark-haired wench, who inspected it by the help of a light simply
contrived by a piece of wick being put into a small open vessel of oil;
and, after having ascertained the state of the stew (for this also was a
stew) she hung her lamp upon a nail affixed to a rafter over her head.
On the stone bench beyond the fire, sat two or three muleteers, who
seemed by their inactivity, to have already tasted the good things of
the venta; for one was manufacturing a cigar in the approved Spanish
mode, by rolling paper round a little tobacco: and the other had already
accomplished this task, and was enveloped in a cloud of smoke--and the
picture of the venta is completed, if we add two or three great lank
dogs standing at the table where the supper party was seated; and two or
three others lying in the neighbourhood of the fire. Such was the state
of the venta, when the gallera party arrived, to claim a share of its
hospitalities. The features of the scene were now greatly multiplied:
one of the party was seen kneeling at the fire, intent upon the
operation of chocolate-making--another was employed in heating a pot of
wine--and my occupation was, watching the progress towards boiling, of
some water meant to deluge the fragrant herb. All these preparations
being completed, the gallera party proposed enjoying their various
refreshments in company, adding to them, the fowl and sausages which had
been brought from Malaga. But the supper-table was still occupied by the
hungry guests, before whom the second supply of stew had just been
placed; and who were employing the interval in passing round the wine in
the southern fashion--each in his turn pouring from the tube of a glass
vessel, a stream of wine, which fell from the distance of a foot, in a
fine arch, into his open mouth. We were accordingly obliged to carry our
refreshments into the chamber, or quarto (for the word chamber suggests
something beyond its deserts), where the young lady had been seen in
bed. The caballero had already taken his leave; and the pretty
_intrigante_ got up, and joined us at supper: this being finished, a
difficulty arose as to our various sleeping accommodations. The mother
and daughter were already provided; for the latter had secured the only
mattress and sheets, when she arrived at the venta; and the doubtful
lady had brought her sleeping apparatus from Malaga. The bed of the two
former was already spread, and the other was speedily deposited in the
opposite corner; and as there was no other quarto in the venta
disengaged, it was proposed that I should make my bed in a corner of the
same quarto: this was better than sitting by the fire, or sleeping on
the mud floor; and I had deposited some clean straw, and my cloak, upon
the ground, and had turned my back to the ladies while they retired to
their mattresses, when a lucky event placed at my disposal, the
comfortable bed of the single lady: the noise of a horses hoofs was
heard, and the commanding voice of a caballero; and when I was permitted
to turn round, I discovered that the lady had disappeared. Soon after,
upon going to the door of the quarto, and looking into the common
apartment, I saw her seated by the gentleman who had newly arrived,
upon a bench near the fire; and after waiting more than half an hour, I
took the liberty of approaching, and asking her when she purposed
returning to occupy her bed, as the other ladies wished to lock the
door, and go to sleep? To this question, the caballero replied for her,
that the ladies might lock the door, and go to sleep when it was
agreeable to them, as no one would disturb them; and receiving no
contradiction of this from his companion, I returned to the quarto,
bolted the door, and took possession of the comfortable berth of the
absent owner.

It was a curious scene next morning, when, upon leaving my bed early, I
could scarcely thread my way among the mattresses spread on the ground;
all occupied by some sleeping or newly-awoke muleteer: round the fire,
these were still more thickly strewn; and I had actually to tempt one
yawning fellow from his bed, by a present of two cigars, that I might
find a vacant spot where I could stand, and prepare my chocolate. It was
then just day-break; and the gallera not being ready, I left the venta,
and walked to the summit of a neighbouring rocky height. The evening is
said to be the most solemn hour; but I have felt that the morning is
solemn too, when, in a desolate scene like this, we stand alone among
the dim mountains, and see the stars faint twinkle, and day preparing
to illuminate a desert,--and hear no sound, that in peopled climes,
welcomes the approach of light.

When we left the venta, we continued to wind through the Sierra, and
then traversed a deep valley, full of wood, and bounded by lofty
mountains. I counted five monumental crosses in this valley. Soon
afterwards, we entered a more cultivated country; and before noon, Loxa
was seen before us at about a league distant. The view and situation of
this old Moorish town, are beyond expression beautiful. It stands upon a
slight elevation, in a valley about half a league wide; the Xenil
circling round the height, and traversing the valley; the mountains that
rise on either side, are covered with the most charming vegetation, and
all the lower slopes near the town, are adorned with gardens, and rich
groves of oranges and lemons; and these so mingle with the buildings,
that the spires of the churches and convents seem to rise out of bowers;
and the houses, partly hid in foliage, appear like a range of villas. We
did not stop in Loxa, which is remarkable chiefly for the beauty of its
situation--but passed on towards Granada. The valley of the Xenil is
extremely fruitful; many ploughs were busy by the river side, and the
young corn had already covered the fields with the freshest green.

A little before sunset, I climbed to the summit of a neighbouring
height, to catch, if possible, a view of the Sierra Nevada,--the snowy
Sierra of Granada--touched by the rosy light of evening; but just as I
had climbed high enough to descry the summit of the range, a large,
lean, and ferocious sheep dog made towards me, and I was satisfied to
purchase an escape, at the expense of losing my labour. The ascent of
this height had separated me a considerable distance from the gallera;
and I still loitered behind, gathering the woodbine,--the first I had
seen in Spain,--that grew profusely by the way side, until reminded of
the propriety of joining my companions by the approaching dusk, and by
a glimpse of two suspicious-looking men, who eyed me very scrutinizingly
from a bank upon which they were sitting. Soon after overtaking the
gallera, we crossed a rapid stream, by a deep, and rather dangerous
ford; and after dark, we arrived at the Venta de Casin, our refuge for
the night. At the same time with ourselves, another gallera arrived from
Granada, so that the venta overflowed with travellers, and three quartos
were all the accommodation it afforded.

Very different is the reception which the traveller meets with at a
Spanish venta, or even posada, and at an English inn. At the Spanish
posada, no bustling waiter with his clean napkin, bows you into the
house; no smart _demoiselle_ drops a curtesy, and leads the traveller
forward with the glance of her black eyes. In the Spanish posada, the
traveller is welcomed by nobody,--is never asked his pleasure, or what
are his wants; he is left to feel his way along a stone wall; and is at
last directed to the kitchen by a glare of light from the fire, which is
kindled on the floor. It is a curious fact too, that the rank of the
traveller makes no difference in his reception. There is not one kind of
welcome for the gentleman traveller, another for the diligence
traveller, and another for the visitor of low degree. All ranks find one
level in a Spanish posada: no separate tables are set; no distinctive
honours are paid; there is no scale of civility; the caballero, the
merchant, the muleteer, is alike left to shift for himself.

By having walked in advance of the gallera, I had secured one of the
three quartos, which I gave up to the females of the party, or rather
shared it with them: and after having succeeded in getting some
hard-boiled eggs, and some excellent wine, I made my bed, and retired to
it; for no repetition of my good fortune occurred this night. But there
was so great a number of mules in the venta, that the tinkling of their
bells, and the noise of their feet, added to the unintermitting attacks
of certain enemies of repose, whose name might be called legion,
prevented the gentle approaches of sleep; and it was with great
satisfaction that I hailed the morning dawn through the paneless
windows. I need scarcely say that window glass is not to be seen in any
village south of the Sierra Morena; and in the most southern, and in the
eastern parts, even the principal posadas in the large towns have rarely
glass in the windows. It is quite a mistake, to suppose that there is no
occasion for glass in the southern parts of Spain. There are many days
during a Spanish winter--and before leaving Spain I had experience of
them--which, in England, would be thought to demand closed windows, and
a blazing fire.

After leaving the Venta de Casin, we entered upon a heathy country,
wild, open, and covered with aromatic plants; and after three hours
travelling, we caught the first view of Imperial Granada,--yet at a
great distance--backed by the lofty Sierra, with its snowy summits. At a
small village famous for its fruits, I purchased a melon as large as a
mans head, for four quartos--a fraction above a penny--and found it
delicious beyond any that I had ever before eaten. Granada is the most
celebrated, among all the Spanish provinces, for its fruits; but, with
the exception of the melon, the pomegranate, and the prickly pear, the
season of fruit was passing. At Santa Fe, the country becomes rich and
populous; for here we are within the influence of irrigation; and now at
every step, Granada rose before us with greater distinctness and
magnificence. The situation of Granada eclipses that of any city that I
have ever seen; and altogether, the view in approaching it, struck me
more forcibly than any other view that I could at that moment recollect.
And yet, the description would not perhaps be very striking on paper;
because the ingredients of its magnificence consist in the vastness and
splendour of its Moorish remains--not a single Alcazar, not a few
isolated ruins, whose dimensions the eye at once embraces--but ranges of
palaces, and castles, and towers, covering elevations a league in
circumference, rising above and stretching beyond one another, with a
subject city at their feet; and almost vying in grandeur with the
gigantic range of the snowy Sierra that towers above them.

It is impossible to approach and to enter Granada without a thousand
associations,--half reality, half romance,--being awakened within us:
many centuries are suddenly swept from the records of time; and the
events of other days are pictured in our imagination. A page of history
is written upon every object that surrounds us. We see the Vega covered
with the Christian camp, and the silken pavilion of Queen Isabella
rising above the tents of the Spanish nobles: we see the queen, and the
ladies of the court, and a gorgeous cavalcade, ride forth towards the
Moorish city; and we see the Moorish cavalry pour through the gates into
the plain, headed by the warrior Muza Ben Abel Gazan; and we see
Boabdil, the last of the Moors, uncrowned and exiled, leave the city of
his affections--the glory of a fallen empire--and turn round from the
last eminence, to gaze yet once more upon the towers of the Alhambra;
and we hear the fallen king, as he turns in silence and sorrow from the
contemplation, exclaim, Allah achbar! God is great.

I will endeavour to convey to the reader some idea of the situation of
Granada, in a matter-of-fact description.

The Vega of Granada is about ten miles long, and seven miles broad; and
being subjected to irrigation, is covered with perpetual verdure, with
grain of every description, with gardens, with olive plantations, and
with orange groves; and it is thickly studded with villages, and country
houses, and cottages. This plain is bounded on the south-east, the east,
and north-east, by a semi-circular range of high mountains called the
Sierra Nevada, the summits of which are always less or more covered with
snow; and when we call to mind the latitude of Granada, this informs us,
without the assistance of trigonometry, that the elevation of these
mountains is great. Upon the outposts of the Sierra stands the city of
Granada--for the most part, built upon the gentle acclivities that lie
between the mountains and the Vega; but some part of it standing upon
the Vega itself. Two rivers, the Xenil and the Daro, flow through the
city, and traverse the Vega. Although the mountains seem from the plain
to rise directly behind the city, this is not precisely the fact; two
ridges, from four hundred to six hundred feet in height, separated from
each other by the Daro, lie between the city and the base of the Sierra:
these directly overlook the city; and upon one of them is situated the
chapel of St. Michael, while the other is entirely covered by the ruins
of the Alhambra. Not only are these heights covered with wood and with
verdure, but the whole city is intermingled with gardens and orangeries;
and, inclosing within it so many _monticules_, which are mostly occupied
by convents and convent gardens, there is a picturesqueness about the
city itself, abstracted from its Alhambra or its environs, that is
peculiarly its own.

From whatever point Granada may be contemplated, it is a sumptuous city;
whether viewed from the plain, or from any of the neighbouring heights:
even in walking the streets, vistas of astonishing beauty are
occasionally discovered; and from the windows of my apartment in the
Fonda del Comercio, I have never seen any thing more gorgeous than
sunset upon the city of Granada; nor any thing more beautiful than the
moonlight falling upon its gardens, and groves, and convents, and
towers, and neighbouring heights, and snow-clad mountains.

The first morning after my arrival, I hastened to the Alhambra. I
entered its precincts by the gate of Granada, and found myself in a
shrubbery, shewing many marks of the unpardonable neglect with which all
the magnificent monuments in Spain are treated, by those who preside
over the destinies of that ill-governed country. I was first conducted
to the Xeneralife, once the residence of Boabdil el Chico, the last of
the Moorish kings. This building stands upon an elevation considerably
higher than the Alhambra, and separated from it by a deep ravine. Some
modern additions have been made to the Xeneralife; but these may easily
be distinguished from the Moorish part of the building. In the palace of
Boabdil, there is nothing particularly worthy of observation; but the
myrtle groves and terraces are agreeable; and from the latter, there is
a charming view over the Alhambra and its gardens.

The Xeneralife, which in the Arabic signifies a pleasure house, is said
to have been built by Omar, who, in that delightful seclusion, gave
himself entirely up to the enjoyment of music. The inscriptions on every
part of the Alhambra, interpret the uses of the different buildings and
chambers. These have all been copied and translated,--and, although a
record of them would be tedious, I may perhaps be permitted to introduce
two or three of the most interesting, as curious relics of Moorish
customs. There is only one connected with the Xeneralife, which appears
worthy of recording. It is on the arcades around a court.

Charming palace! splendid art thou, and great as thou art splendid! all
is bright around thee. Worthy art thou to be praised, for divinity is in
all thy charms: flowers adorn thy garden; they nod upon their stalks,
and fill the air with their sweet perfume. A breeze plays with the
blossoms of the orange tree, and their delightful fragrance is wafted
around. Hark! voluptuous music mingles with the gentle rustling of the
leaves,--sweet harmony! and verdure and flowers encompass me. Thou, oh
Abulgali! most excellent of kings; guardian of the faithful, and of the
law,--thou art the object of my reverence. May God be ever with thee,
and may he crown thy hopes! Thy greatness throwest dignity on all that
thou doest. This apartment, dedicated to thee, is full of perfection and
strength,--its duration will be coeval with our faith,--it is a wonder
and a triumph.

From the Xeneralife, I descended by a steep path shaded by fine elms;
and crossing the ravine, entered the precincts of the Alhambra, by what
is called the Gate of Iron. The remains of seven gates are passed before
reaching the inner court, where Charles V. had the bad taste to project
the erection of a palace, which yet remains in an unfinished state:
close to this palace stands the Alhambra, the most perfect monument of
Moorish magnificence that the world contains. Passing through an oblong
court, with a colonnade at each end, I found myself in the Court of
Lions, a fine and perfect specimen of Moorish taste. The Court, formerly
paved with marble, has been converted into a garden; it is surrounded by
a colonnade of one hundred and forty elegant white marble pillars; and
in the centre, is a fountain supported by thirteen lions: there, the
last of the Moorish kings were doubtless wont to retire from the
council, to ruminate upon their misfortunes, and the probable
termination of their empire.

Upon the alabaster bowl which the lions support, there is a long
inscription,--great part of it is without beauty; and owing to the
darkness in which the events of Moorish history are buried, it is for
the most part unintelligible. This indeed is an observation which may
apply to many of the inscriptions in the Alhambra. The conclusion of the
inscription is as follows:--The purity of the alabaster and of the
water may vie with each other. If thou wouldst distinguish the water,
look narrowly into the bowl; for both might be liquid, or both solid.
The water seems to envy the beauty of the basin where it lies; and the
basin is jealous of the crystal water. Beautiful is the stream that
issues from my bosom, thrown high into the air by the profuse hand of
Mahomed. His generosity excels the strength of the lion!

From the court of Lions you enter various halls, each of them
distinguished by the singularity, and some by the beauty of their walls
and roofs, which are of the same materials as those of the Alcazar of
Seville, but of better workmanship, and more vivid in colour. Of these
halls, the most magnificent is the hall of the ambassadors, or audience
chamber. The bed-chamber of the king and queen is a curious sample of
Moorish taste, and throws some light, too, upon the customs of these
days. There are two alcoves for the separate beds of the king and queen,
with pillars before them; and in the middle of the chamber there is a
marble fountain: the floor is of porcelain, and the only light is
admitted through the door. Immediately adjoining the bed-room, are two
baths. The boudoir of the queen is in a more elevated part of the
building, in a circular tower, from which a magnificent prospect is
enjoyed. Many foolish persons have torn away pieces of the fretwork from
the walls, in different parts of the Alhambra; but the old woman who now
accompanies the visitor, looks so keenly after her charge, that, unless
she be accessible to bribery, I should think it difficult to commit a
theft.

One of these gardens was formerly called Lindaraxa; and as an example of
the extravagant, I shall quote the inscription which refers to this
garden. The beauty and the excellence that are in me, proceed from
Mahomed. His goodness surpasses that of beings that have passed, and
that are to come. Among five stars, three turn pale beside his superior
brightness; my master gives lightness to the murkiest atmosphere: the
stars sicken with love of him; and to them, he communicates the perfume
of plants, and the sweet odour of virtues. Their business is to
enlighten the firmament, else would they dart from their places, and
seek his presence. By his command, stones are firmly rooted: it is his
power that communicates to them their delicate workmanship; and by his
will do they remain firm. The marble softens at his voice; and the light
of his eyes scatters darkness. Where is there a garden like unto this?
its verdure and its fragrance excel all others; and its freshness is
diffused far around!

I must not omit to make mention of the Hall of the Abencerrages, so
called from an historical fact with which it is connected, and which is
probably known to the reader. It was in the year 1491, when Abdali was
king, that two great families, the Gomels and the Legris, conspired the
ruin of the Abencerrages, the greatest of the Moorish families. To
effect this, they invented a tale, by which they fixed dishonour upon
the queen, and connected it with Albin Hamet, the chief of the family.
The king in his fury, resolved to extirpate the family; and they were
sent for to the Alhambra, one by one, and the moment they entered, each
was beheaded beside an alabaster vase, which yet stands in the hall, and
which is said to have overflowed with their blood. Thirty-five of the
family fell victims; but the rest being warned by a page who escaped,
they raised the city in their cause, penetrated the palace, and slew
many of the Gomels and the Legris, who there defended the king, who took
refuge in a neighbouring mosque. The conquest of Granada speedily
followed this event.

No description can convey to the reader any just idea of the Alhambra of
Granada; nor is it merely the courts, and halls, and fountains, that
excite the interest of the traveller: with every one of these, there is
some historic and romantic association; and he that would fully enjoy
the hours, or days, spent among these splendid tokens of the Moorish
empire, must prepare himself by a perusal of that delightful work, the
Chronicle of the Conquest of Granada. He will there find a thousand
stirring, romantic, or affecting pictures, peopling the Alhambra with
recollections--interesting, as human passions and human affections can
make them; and if they be not as vivid as they are interesting, the
fault will be in himself, and not in the writer, who with so graphic a
pen has sketched the scenes from which they are drawn. I spent the
morning of several days wandering over the Alhambra, and found no
diminution in the interest awakened by these majestic remains. I did not
forget to visit the postern gate through which Boabdil el Chico went
forth to surrender his empire, and which he requested might be closed
up, that no one might enter or pass out by the same gate. Accident has
now sealed the request of the Moorish king, for the entrance is closed
up with stones.[C]

The finest point of view in the neighbourhood of Granada, is not from
the Alhambra; because the view must be imperfect, unless the Alhambra be
itself one of the features. The chapel of St. Michael, upon the opposite
height, is the spot to be attained; and to this little excursion, I
devoted a morning. The hill upon which the chapel stands, is one
labyrinth of aloes and Indian fig, which form an impenetrable thicket,
unless where the zig-zag path is cut; and of so sturdy a growth are
these, that the prospect towards the city and the Vega is entirely shut
out. But this mount is curious and interesting on another account: every
ten or twelve yards, you pass the exit of a narrow path cut through the
aloes, and leading, a few yards forward, to the door, or rather the
mouth of a hovel, excavated in the face of the hill. These habitations
are tenanted by the very lowest of the population, as may well be
believed; and I counted a hundred and forty of them. I requested
permission to enter one, at the door of which, a young woman in rags,
sat spinning flax; she told me that her husband was out with his gun
seeking rabbits, and the only other inmate of the hovel, was a child,
asleep upon a mattress on the ground. I saw no furniture, excepting two
stools and this mattress, and the light found its way in, and the smoke
its way out, at the entrance, to which there was no door; but the woman
said, that before winter, they meant to supply this want; and that they
also intended to construct a chimney, or, at least, a hole by which the
smoke might escape. I noticed that some of the other hovels had
chimneys, but I saw no one with a door. I was not sorry, when, after
many times losing my way in this labyrinth, set upon by fierce hungry
dogs, and meeting many suspicious-looking persons, I gained the summit
of the mount, and an open space where I could see around me. The view
was superb: in front stood the old Moorish town--on the left, lay the
ravine of the Daro--and beyond it, the whole range of the Alhambra, with
its towers, and walls, and arches, and pillars, and the rocky ridge upon
which it stands, beautifully shaded and coloured by the woods, over
which late autumn had thrown his rich and nameless tints: still higher,
stood the Xeneralife; and above this range, the dark defiles and snowy
summits of the Sierra, towered into the serene skies. The view was of a
different character, looking towards the west: Stretching from the foot
of the Alhambra, lay the city, with its many spires and towers, and all
its groves and gardens; and still farther, was spread out the rich and
fertile Vega, traversed by its winding rivers, and losing itself in the
hazy distance. Not wishing to run the risk of losing myself again in the
labyrinth of prickly pear, or to encounter the dogs--some of which owed
me a grudge, for having threatened them with a stone--I succeeded in
finding another road back to the city. In this walk, I could not but
observe the remarkable changes of temperature to which Granada is
subject.--Walking up the sunny side of the mount, I many times blessed
the friendly shade of the prickly pear, and the enormous leaves of the
aloe; so scorching was the sun; and yet, under the wall, on the shaded
side of the mount, the hoar frost was lying; and this same evening, I
found it so cold in the hotel, that I drank tea, and received some
visitors in bed.

The second night I slept in Granada, I was awoke about midnight by an
extraordinary confusion of sounds: bells from the seventy or eighty
convents and churches, rung out an alarm; sometimes in discordant
chorus, sometimes one ceasing, and another commencing--sometimes, after
a moment of perfect silence, all again breaking into a general
peal--trumpets, distant and near, filled up the intervals, or pierced
shrilly through the crash of bells--and mingled with these sounds, were
heard the roll of drums, the hurrying of footsteps, and the howling of
dogs. Naturally supposing that all this must indicate something, I
hastily dressed, and putting on my hat, hurried down stairs; but the
master of the _fonda_ stopped me at the door, telling me he could upon
no account allow me to go out; the cause of the disturbance, he said,
was a fire, and it would be extremely imprudent for a stranger to trust
himself in the streets. Recollecting Malaga, I did not contend the point
with him, but contented myself with looking from the window of my
apartment. The noise still continued, and the fire not being speedily
got under by human efforts, stronger measures were resorted to: the
sound of bells and trumpets was exchanged for the song of monks. I heard
the monotonous hum from several quarters; lights in long lines were seen
approaching; and soon one procession, and then another, headed by a
silver virgin, or a wooden saint, crossed the Plaza; and all the while,
the streets were paraded by single friars, each tinkling a little bell,
and crying aloud Holy Mary! Blessed Virgin! save this city! This
proved effectual, for the fire was subdued before morning. I need
scarcely add, that before these processions issue from the convents, a
hint has been received, that the fire will speedily be got under,--and
who can be surprised that the brethren of St. Francis, or St. Dominick,
should seize so excellent an opportunity of publishing a miracle?

Among the objects most worthy of notice in Granada, the cathedral must
not be passed over. I was already almost surfeited with marbles and
gilding, and paid little attention to these; but there are some other
things deserving of observation. Among them, the most remarkable and the
most beautiful, are the Sarcophagi of Ferdinand and Isabella, the
conquerors of Granada: which are of white marble,--sculptured with great
taste and delicacy. The sword and sceptre of these illustrious
personages, are preserved in the sacristy. I observed a curious notice
affixed to every conspicuous part of the walls, forbidding any man to
speak to a woman within the cathedral under the pain of excommunication,
and the penalty of two ducats, to be given to holy purposes; thus making
good spring out of evil. There were formerly some good pictures in the
cathedral, but they did not escape the rapacity of the French.

The convents of Granada are not distinguished for their pictures; but
the admirer of fine marbles will find nothing in the Escurial equal to
the marbles that adorn some of the convents of this city. I visited four
of the convents--the Dominicans, the Hieronomites, Juan de Dios, and the
Carthusians. The Dominican convent is remarkable as the depository of a
piece of marble found in the Sierra Nevada, upon which is distinctly
represented the flight into Egypt; or at all events, a pictorial
resemblance of the objects which are generally selected by the painter
to illustrate this piece of history: the marble is in so elevated a
situation, that suspecting some deception, I obtained a ladder, and
examined it closely; but I found that the friar had not deceived me.
Juan de Dios contains, besides much fine marble and innumerable relics,
the real body of John of God. The urn was formerly placed within a dome
of pure silver, supported by silver pillars, but the French carried off
these, and a wooden temple has been substituted: it is somewhat curious
that the French should have respected the saint so much as to leave the
silver urn in which his body is contained. Judging however, by the order
which he has instituted, the memory of John of God is entitled to
veneration. The monks of this order do not spend their lives in sloth,
but devote them to the succour of the wretched: there is always an
hospital attached to a convent of this order. The Carthusian convent of
Granada is one of the most splendid, and one of the richest in Spain:
its revenues are immense; and being inhabited by only eleven monks, who
live on fish and fruits, the convent treasury must be well stored. The
marbles of this convent are beyond price; and all the doors and the
panels round the sacristy are mosaic of mother-of-pearl, ivory, ebony,
and tortoise-shell. They have some pictures, said to be from the hand of
Murillo; but this I disbelieve.

It is said, that formerly five thousand poor were fed daily in Granada
by the archbishop and by the convents: at present, however, only four of
the convents supply the needy; but the archbishop gives all that he can
spare. His revenues, which formerly amounted to one hundred thousand
dollars, do not now exceed forty thousand. I went one morning to the
archepiscopal residence, to obtain an order to see a country-house
belonging to this dignitary; but he was in bed, unwell; and while the
majordomo was sent for, I entered at one of the doors opening from the
yard, and found myself in the kitchen. Four dishes were preparing for
his lordships breakfast;--a white soup, a stew of pigeons, pigs feet,
and stewed cellery--which, with dessert and wine, was a tolerable
breakfast for a sick archbishop.

Among the letters which I carried with me to Granada, one was addressed
to General OLowlor, Lieutenant-Governor of the province, and
Commissioner for the Duke of Wellington, in the management of his
Graces estates in this neighbourhood. From Gen. OLowlor I obtained
accurate information respecting the state of agriculture in the Vega of
Granada, as well as regarding the property of the Duke of Wellington;
and I have great pleasure in recording my acknowledgments to this
gentleman, for the many kind and polite attentions which I received from
him.

The following is the usual rotation of crops in the Vega of Granada.
After the land has been fully manured, hemp is put in; and two, or
sometimes three crops of wheat, according to the nature of the land, are
taken in the same year: a crop of flax, and a crop of Indian corn follow
the next year, and beans and Indian corn are taken the third year. For
this last crop the land is half manured; and then it is fully manured
for the hemp, to begin the next rotation. The hemp is considered
necessary to prepare the land for wheat, which otherwise would come up
too strong after the manure. This is the rotation on land which is
subjected to the process of irrigation.

Agriculture, in the best parts of Spain, is not in a flourishing
condition; agricultural produce of every kind, the value of land and
rents, have all fallen. Ten years ago, land in the Vega of Granada was
worth from fifty to a hundred dollars per acre: at present, it does not
average above sixteen. Wheat sold, ten years ago, at three dollars the
_fanega_; now, it does not average, year by year, more than one dollar
and a half. Rents are of course fallen in proportion; and low as rents
are, they are difficult to be recovered. Upon the lands which are not
capable of being irrigated, the crops are extremely precarious; and
where a money-rent is required, it is next to impossible to find a
cultivator for the land. As a remedy for this, proprietors of high lands
are contented to receive a certain proportion of the crop--generally a
fifth; and upon land subject to irrigation, a tenant is willing to pay
one fourth part of the produce. Land, generally, in the Vega of Granada,
returns four per cent., taxes paid; but a considerable quantity returns
as much as six per cent. The return from land under tillage, is greater
than that from meadow land.

The estates belonging to the Duke of Wellington, lie in the lower part
of the Vega, about two leagues from Granada; and all the land is capable
of irrigation. His Graces estates return about fifteen thousand dollars
per annum; his rents are paid in grain--a fixed quantity, not a
proportion of the crop; a plan beginning to be pretty universally
followed by other land-owners. The Duke has three hundred tenants, from
which it appears that very small farms are held in the Vega of Granada;
for if the whole rental be divided by three hundred, the average rent of
the possessions will be but fifty dollars each. The tenants upon the
Dukes estate are thriving; they pay no taxes; and these estates are
exempt from many of the heavy burthens thrown upon land. A composition
of six per cent. is accepted from the Duke of Wellington, in lieu of all
demands.

Before the loss of the colonies, taxation was light; the revenue being
mainly supported through them. This loss was a severe and irrecoverable
blow; and whether by the burthens which it has thrown upon land,--by
drying up the former sources of revenue,--or by the extinction of the
best and only sure market for Spanish manufactures, it is a blow felt
throughout every department of Spanish industry. Before the loss of the
colonies, there was in Granada an extensive manufactory of ribbons,
which found in South America a wide, ready, and exclusive market,--no
fewer than two thousand hands were employed in it; but since that event,
it has entirely fallen. Many persons who were in that trade, and were
accounted the richest in the city, have become bankrupts; others have
closed their concerns, and turned their attention to agriculture; and
hundreds of the artizans are in a state of perfect destitution,
supported only by charity or thieving: to so great an extent has theft
been carried, that in one night, while I was in Granada, twenty-six
persons were arrested in the act. The export trade in oil has also
suffered severely from the loss of the colonies: before that event, it
fetched from eighty to one hundred dollars the arroba; and now, it
cannot command more than from twenty to twenty-six dollars. The export
wine trade from the southern provinces, has suffered the least: the
imposition of import-duties has, of course, somewhat limited the demand,
by increasing the price in America; but in articles of taste, such as
wine, or any thing that is the exclusive produce or manufacture of a
mother country, the separation of colonies but slightly affects the
market: the colonists have acquired a taste for such produce, and they
will continue to give a preference to it, notwithstanding a political
separation.

I will venture to say, that no city in Europe can boast of promenades so
delightful as those of Granada. Besides the many romantic walks in the
neighbourhood of the city--to the hill of martyrs; to St. Michaels
mount, and to the nearer ridges of the Sierra; there are two professed
alamedas: one, along the banks of the Xenil; the other, by the margin of
the Daro: the former is within the city, and is the most frequented; the
other is a path above the Daro, which flows through a deep and finely
wooded ravine. Nothing in Switzerland excels the romantic and striking
scenery of the valley of the Daro,--for along with the picturesque views
within the valley, magnificent glimpses of the glorious Alhambra, and
the gorgeous city, are frequently caught beyond it.

The appearance of the population of Granada differs little from that of
the population of Malaga; there is nearly an equal quantity of beggary
and idleness; but it occurred to me, that among the lower orders, there
was more rudeness than in any of the other cities of the south:
strangers are more stared at than elsewhere; and it is rarely that one
passes a group of idlers, that a gibe and a laugh do not follow. This
may perhaps be accounted for, from the greater rarity of strangers in
Granada than in Cadiz, Seville, or Malaga. One morning, my walk
conducted me through the market-place, which is not appropriated to
edibles only, but which contains all kinds of goods, exposed in stalls:
it is in fact, a general bazaar. The central part is occupied by meat,
fruit, and vegetables; and round the sides, the other goods are exposed.
At one end, under a range of sheds, all kinds of trades are carried on.
I remarked an extraordinary shew of vegetables and fruits, especially
dried fruits; but among all the articles exposed for sale, nothing
appeared to be so much in demand as hot potatoes; the supply of which
was constantly kept up by a regular apparatus of fire, water, and a
steamer. This seemed a favourite breakfast, for scores were sitting upon
the ground enjoying it; a little boy, to whom I gave a trifle for
shewing me a barbers shop, immediately upon receiving his quartos, sat
down upon the ground with his purchase of potatoes, apparently highly
delighted with the treat. I noticed a Franciscan, perambulating the
stalls with an image of Christ under his arm, and those who gave him any
thing were permitted to kiss the image,--a favour that seemed to procure
him ample supplies. I inquired the prices of some articles in the
market, and found them to differ little from the prices of Malaga: eggs
were a halfpenny a-piece, in place of a penny, as in Malaga; bread was
somewhat cheaper, and all kinds of game extremely low in price.

The manner of life in Granada differs little from that of Malaga; only
that being inland, and having less communication with strangers, Spanish
usages are more unmixed. Every one takes chocolate, and goes to mass in
the morning. Every lady dresses, and seats herself upon her couch with
her fan in her hand, her basket at her feet, and her embroidery before
her, waiting the arrival of visitors; every one dines _a la cuisine
Espaole_,--eats melon and pomegranate, and takes a siesta,--and every
one goes to the paseo in the evening. When I was at Granada, a
Neopolitan company gave operas every second night. The prima donna,
Seora Cresoti, would have done honour to any opera in Europe,--but she
was only indifferently supported. It is a curious fact, however, that
several of the provincial towns of Spain--poverty-stricken Spain! should
be able to support an Italian opera; and that in England, London alone,
and with difficulty, supports an indifferent company. This can only be
accounted for from the absence of musical taste in England; for there is
not a country town to which the expense could be any barrier. What
salaries are paid to the singers in Malaga and Granada, I have no access
to know; but where a whole box may be engaged for 7_s._, and the price
of the pit is only 10_d._, these cannot be very extravagant.

The origin of Granada is hidden in the obscurity of antiquity. It is
said to have been founded nearly three thousand years before the
Christian era; it is at all events certain, that during the time of the
Romans, Granada was a place of some importance: but the name of the
founder, as well as the precise date of the foundation, are altogether
matter of conjecture.




CHAPTER XVIII.

JOURNEY FROM GRANADA TO MURCIA.--MURCIA.

     The best mode of travelling this Road; Precautions necessary; the
     Village of Huetor, and its Venta; Aspect of the Country; an
     Encounter; Diezma; singular Scenery; Guadix; Journey from Guadix;
     excessive Cold; Baza, and its Valley; Cullar de Baza; excavated
     Dwellings; a probable intention of Robbery; Chirivel; Desolate
     Country on the confines of Murcia; Puerto; the Vale of Lorca, Dress
     of the Murcian Peasantry; Lorca Market; the Cathedral, and
     Liberality of the Archbishop of Carthagena; Totana; a Dance;
     Approach to Murcia, and extraordinary beauty of its Vale; Murcia,
     its Streets and Population; Magnificent View from the summit of the
     Cathedral Tower; Paseos and Environs; a ridiculous Observance;
     Prices of Provisions; Manufacture of Salt-Petre; Silk Manufacture;
     Agriculture.


I had always looked upon this, as the journey in which I might expect to
find the most privations, and that most abounded in hazard; and the
little information I was able to receive at Granada, tended rather to
confirm than to dissipate these anticipations. It is, indeed,
surprising how very little information I was able to obtain at Granada:
there is no commerce between Granada and Murcia; the communication
between the southern provinces, and Valencia, and Catalunia, is entirely
carried on by sea; and the few persons who pass from Granada to the
east, generally take shipping at Malaga, for Valencia. Every one was
agreed, however, that the road was execrable, and totally impassable
after rain; that the accommodations upon the road were as bad as they
could be; and that the probabilities of robbery outweighed the chances
of escape. The few persons who had travelled that road, had invariably
taken an escort; and this I was told, I could by no means dispense with.
I resolved, however, to be guided by the opinion of General OLowlor;
and, acting upon his advice, I engaged a _tartana_, a small covered cart
with one mule, and a muleteer, recommended by him as an honest man. An
honest muleteer is the principal security of a traveller; for I am
convinced from what I have subsequently heard, that an escort is
totally useless, unless it be composed of soldiers; and, in a long
journey, the expense of a sufficient escort will amount to as much as
one runs the risk of losing by being robbed; because no traveller in
Spain ever carries an overflowing purse. The best mode is, to pay the
muleteer a part, before setting out, and the remainder at the end of the
journey, which can, of course, be managed by carrying a letter of
credit; and the traveller ought to carry in his pocket only what may
suffice for his personal expenses, with as much more added, as will
satisfy banditti, in case of being attacked by them; for otherwise, the
traveller is exposed to violence. If one chooses to hire four soldiers,
the risk of robbery is entirely at an end; but this, in a journey to
Murcia from Granada, would cost thirty-five dollars; exceeding by at
least fifteen dollars, the amount of the purse which it is necessary to
have in readiness, in case of meeting with robbers. An escort of
peasantry is totally useless. Many instances have occurred, in which
travellers have been betrayed by their escort; and I could hear of no
instance in which the escort had stood to defend the traveller; but,
indeed, it is better that they should run away, as resistance would only
endanger his life. Resistance is a thing that no traveller in certain
parts of Spain should ever dream of: before setting out, he must make up
his mind to the probability of being robbed, and provide accordingly;
not by hiring an escort, or by loading his pistols; but, by putting
about twenty dollars into a separate purse, to buy civility in case of
need; and by obtaining a letter of credit upon the next town.

The distance between Granada and Murcia is not very accurately measured;
but it is computed to be about forty-seven leagues, which is nearly two
hundred miles. For this journey, I agreed to pay the muleteer
twenty-five dollars; which I thought a reasonable demand for a journey
of thirteen days. I did not intend to make much use of the tartana,
excepting for carrying my portmanteau, and a basket of provisions; the
mule walks the whole of the way; and the daily journey averaging only
about thirty-two miles, it would be no difficult matter to keep pace
with it.

I left Granada at three oclock, P.M., in order that we might arrive the
same night at a village called Huetor; from which an easy journey would
carry us to Guadix the night following. By any other arrangement, we
should have been obliged to rest every night at a solitary venta. We no
sooner got clear of Granada, than we were enclosed among the mountains;
and in a wild, uncultivated country, overrun with the Esparto rush,--the
Sierra Nevada lying on our right, and a range of other, and somewhat
lower, mountains on our left. The road alternately descended into deep
narrow valleys, and climbed the heights that separated them; but, upon
the whole, we gradually got into a higher country; and it was dusk long
before we reached Huetor. I noticed several fires blazing in remote
spots of the ravines; and one of these we passed so near, that I was
able to distinguish several persons around it: the muleteer told me that
these persons were migratory peasantry, who avoided the ventas from
economy; or, perhaps, houseless persons, who lived by the produce of
their gun. About half a mile before reaching Huetor, we passed a chapel
erected in a very dreary spot; a lamp burned before an image of the
virgin, and the light, shining upon the road, shewed me a monumental
cross standing by the way-side. Soon after, we reached the village and
its venta.

This venta was a bad specimen of the accommodation I was likely to find
on the road. Although only four leagues from Granada, I should have been
obliged to go supperless to bed, unless for the provision I had wisely
made against such an event. I superintended the boiling of some water,
infused my tea, got my bread and little jar of Dutch butter from my
basket, and cut into a most delicious ham, which had been presented to
me, and prepared at Granada. Sugar was the only thing I had forgotten;
but this the good people of the venta undertook to supply from the
village; and it was soon brought, in four separate papers, wrapped up
like powders received from an apothecary. Having made a comfortable
meal, I next went in search of a bed, and succeeded in finding a
mattress, which I laid upon six chairs; and, covering myself with my
cloak--of course, without undressing--I slept tolerably well till roused
by the muleteer, although the wind and rain beat in at the open window
half the night. When I went in search of the tartana, I found no fewer
than sixty-nine mules in the venta, some ready to set out, and others
standing in their places--the muleteers sleeping beside them: all these
were going to Granada, laden with the Esparto rush, which is extensively
manufactured into baskets.

After the nights rain, the morning was hazy; but it gradually cleared
away, and fine weather succeeded. On the outskirts of the village, I
noticed these words inscribed upon a house in large letters, _Viva el
Rey absoluto_, Long live the absolute King:--and soon after, in a
little hollow, I passed a cross which recorded a murder, committed there
five months before, upon a traveller who had been so rash as to offer
resistance to banditti. When we left the village behind us, we left the
road behind us also: it was now no longer a road, but only a track of
the rudest kind, winding among the ridges of the Sierra; the ground was
entirely without cultivation. Mingled with the Esparto rush, lavender,
sweet marjorum and thyme, covered the lower part of the mountains;
which, higher up, were bare and stony; and the snowy peaks of the Sierra
Nevada, bounded the horizon. At a wild and desolate spot, where enormous
rocks were strewn around--a secure and admirable retreat for thieves--we
suddenly came upon two men seated in a hollow of the rocks, armed with
guns, and with pistols stuck in their girdles; and when I saw them leave
their places, and hasten down the rock towards us, I began to think of
feeling for the purse of twenty dollars. They, however, adopted a
different mode of supplying their needs,--thinking it safer to ask for
money, as guards of the road, than as robbers. I gave them a dollar
betwixt them, with which they appeared to be contented; and, giving me
in return, _Muchas gracias_, and the parting salutation, _Vaya Vd.
con la Virgen_, they scrambled up among the rocks. The salutation
differs in different provinces: before reaching Granada, it had always
been Go with God! now, it was, Go with the Virgin. From this spot,
the road continued to wind among the mountains, amid the same wild and
desolate scenery, till we arrived at Diezma, a small village, with a
venta attached to it. Here I again found my ham useful, and, with some
eggs and chocolate, I had no reason to complain of my breakfast. The
venta, however, seemed very miserable: they had to send into the village
for the small quantity of bread I required, and for a little wine. But
there was an excuse for the neglected state of this venta; the husband
of its mistress had been stabbed in a quarrel only the day before, and
had been buried that morning.

After leaving Diezma, we entered a very singular looking country; it was
covered with monticules, and pyramids of clay, sand, and gravel, from
thirty to a hundred feet high, forming a perfect labyrinth, through
which the road tortuously wound. This forenoon we had nothing to fear
from robbers, for our party was numerous, consisting of about fifty
mules and ten or twelve muleteers. I walked all the way along with the
muleteers, entering into conversation with them, and from time to time
assisting them in diminishing the rotundity of their wine-skins: a
traveller must never refuse to put the wine-skin to his mouth; to refuse
this offered courtesy, is looked upon as a serious affront. It requires
some practice, however, to use the skin without wasting the wine, and
deluging the bosom: and nothing but habit can teach this art.

This singular labyrinth continued about two leagues, when we reached a
small village, called Parillena, in the neighbourhood of which I
observed many hovels excavated in the clay banks--the wretched retreats
of the miserably poor. It did not surprise me to see no fewer than five
records of murder in this neighbourhood. Between this village and
Guadix, parts of the country are under tillage; and I saw some ploughs
at work, and several persons sowing in the fields, although it was
Sunday; but I never observed that, in the South of Spain, any
distinction is made between Sundays and other days. It is not as in
France, a day of recreation; every one plies his trade as usual. In the
towns, all the shops are thronged; and in the country, those who wish to
be industrious are industrious still.

Guadix, which is situated within half a league of the Sierra Nevada, is
approached through a fine avenue of trees; and the land on both sides is
rich, and subjected to irrigation from the small stream of the same
name. We reached the town, or city I believe, about sun-set, and halted
at the best posada the place afforded; but it boasted no provisions, and
being unwilling to draw too constantly upon my stores, I walked into the
market, and purchased a rabbit for four reals (eight pence), which,
stewed with potatoes, afforded me a comfortable supper. During the
night, I was awoke by sounds of quarrelling under the windows, and upon
rising and looking out, I saw a man lying upon the ground, and several
persons collected about him. Next morning, I learned that the man had
been stabbed in an affray by his brother-in-law, after having been
engaged in playing cards. Guadix is famous for its midnight frays; and
it is here, those murderous knives are made, which are in general use
throughout all the south of Spain. This is the only manufacture of
Guadix, the inhabitants generally being employed in agriculture. This
city is a bishops see; it has a cathedral, four churches, and seven
convents; and contains between five and six thousand inhabitants.

Next day, I left Guadix before sun-rise; the morning was fine, but
rather chilly. All the clay banks in the neighbourhood of Guadix, are
excavated into human habitations: the first league from the town, I
counted one hundred and sixty of these miserable hovels; and some of
their inmates, who looked from the outlets, exhibited the very acm of
wretchedness.

After leaving Guadix, we entered a vast open plain, traversed by deep
ravines, and almost wholly abandoned to the Esparto rush: here and
there, I noticed some feeble attempts at cultivation; and some flocks of
sheep were feeding upon the lower acclivities of the Sierra, which
bounded the plain on the right. The venta, fourteen miles distant from
Guadix, was the first house we saw; and we therefore cease to wonder at
the neglected state of a plain in which there are no human habitations.
The venta at which we stopped furnished chocolate, and bread, and good
wine; and with my ham and butter-jar, I feasted luxuriously. I noticed
an improvement in the construction of the interior of this venta: there
was a circular stone bench round the place where the fire is made upon
the floor, large enough for a dozen persons; and it was indeed occupied
by nearly as many when we entered it; for there was the old man and his
wife, the son of the old couple and his wife, three children, and two
great dogs. Two very suspicious looking men were standing, apparently
about to leave the venta; but when I arrived, they sat down again; and
one of them put a number of questions to me, as to where I had come
from, where I was going, and if I had no companions. I had already
received a hint from the honest muleteer, not to answer questions of
that kind; and I pretended not to understand him. The muleteer, to whom
he immediately afterwards put the same questions, told him that I had
left Guadix an hour sooner than my companions; and that before we
arrived at Baza, we expected to be overtaken by four of my countrymen.

After leaving this venta, we continued constantly ascending, and soon
reached a very elevated and exposed plain, bounded by snowy mountains;
the cold was intense. I had never felt a more cutting wind in England;

