SIXTH TABLET.

1. On hearing the words of the gods, the heart of Marduk moved him to
carry out the works of a craftsman.

2. He opened his mouth, he spake to Ea that which he had planned in
his heart, he gave counsel [saying]:

3. "I will solidify blood, I will form bone.

4. "I will set up man, 'Man' [shall be] his name.

5. "I will create the man 'Man.'

6. "The service of the gods shall be established, and I will set them
(i.e., the gods) free.

7. "I will make twofold the ways of the gods, and I will beautify
[them].

8. "They are [now] grouped together in one place, but they shall be
partitioned in two."[1]

[Footnote 1: Reading, _ishtenish lu kuppudu-ma ana shina lu
uzizu_.]

9. Ea answered and spake a word unto him

10. For the consolation of the gods[1] he repeated unto him a word of
counsel [saying]:

[Footnote 1: _I.e._, "to cause the gods to be content,"]

11. "Let one brother [god of their number] be given, let him suffer
destruction that men may be fashioned.

12. "Let the great gods be assembled, let this [chosen] one be given
in order that they (i.e., the other gods) may be established."

13. Marduk assembled the great gods, [he came near] graciously, he
issued a decree,

14. He opened his mouth, he addressed the gods; the King spake a word
unto the Anunnaki [saying]:

15. "Verily, that which I spake unto you aforetime was true.

16. "[This time also] I speak truth. [Some there were who] opposed
me.[1]

[Footnote 1: Literally "they (indefinite) opposed me."]

17. "Who was it that created the strife,

18. "Who caused Tiâmat to revolt, to join battle with me?

19. "Let him who created the strife be given [as sacrifice],

20. "I will cause the axe in the act of sinking to do away his sin."

21. The great gods, the Igigi, answered him,

22. Unto the King of the gods of heaven and of earth, the Prince of
the gods, their lord [they said]:

23. "[It was] Kingu who created the strife,

24. "Who made Tiâmat to revolt, to join battle [with thee]."

25. They bound him in fetters [they brought] him before Ea, they
inflicted punishment on him, they let his blood,

26. From his blood he (i.e., Ea) fashioned mankind for the
service of the gods, and he set the gods free.

27. After Ea had fashioned man he ... laid service upon him.

28. [For] that work, which pleased him not, man was chosen: Marduk ...

29. Marduk, the King of the gods, divided ... he set the Anunnaki up
on high.

30. He laid down for Anu a decree that protected [his] heart ... as a
guard.

31. He made twofold the ways on the earth [and in the heavens?]

32. By decrees ...

33. The Anunnaki who ...

34. The Anunnaki ...

35. They spake unto Marduk, their lord, [saying]:

36. "O thou Moon-god[1] (Nannaru), who hast established our splendour,

[Footnote 1: See _Cuneiform Texts_, Part XXIV, Plate 50, where it
is said that the god Sin is "Marduk, who maketh bright the night."]

37. "What benefit have we conferred upon thee?

38. "Come, let us make a shrine, whose name shall be renowned;

39. "Come [at] night, our time of festival, let us take our ease
therein,

40. "Come, the staff shall rule ...

41. "On the day that we reach [thereto] we will take our ease
therein."

42. On hearing this Marduk ...

43. The features of his face [shone like] the day exceedingly.

44. [He said],[1] "Like unto ... Babylon, the construction whereof ye
desire

[Footnote 1: Lines 44 and 45 announce Marduk's determination to build
Babylon.]

45. "I will make ... a city, I will fashion a splendid shrine."

46. The Anunnaki worked the mould [for making bricks], their bricks
were ...

47. In the second year [the shrine was as high as] a hill, and the
summit of E-Sagila reached the [celestial] Ocean.

48. They made the ziggurat[1] [to reach] the celestial Ocean; unto
Marduk, Enlil, Ea [shrines] they appointed,

[Footnote 1: This is the word commonly used for "temple-tower." The
famous ziggurat of E-Sagila here mentioned was built in Seven Stages
or Steps, each probably having its own distinctive colour. It was
destroyed probably soon after the capture of Babylon by Cyrus (539
B.C.) and when Alexander the Great reached Babylon he found it ruins.]

49. It (i.e., the ziggurat) stood before them majestically: at the
bottom and [at the top] they observed its two horns.[1]

[Footnote 1: This is the first known mention of the "horns" of a
ziggurat, and the exact meaning of the word is doubtful.]

50. After the Anunnaki had finished the construction of E-Sagila, and
had completed the making of their shrines,

51. They gathered together from the ... of the Ocean (Apsu). In
BAR-MAH, the abode which they had made,

52. He (i.e., Marduk) made the gods his fathers to take their
seats ... [saying]: "This Babylon shall be your abode.

53. "No mighty one [shall destroy] his house, the great gods shall
dwell therein.

[After line 53 the middle portions of several lines of text are
obliterated, but from what remains of it it is clear that the gods
partook of a meal of consecration of the shrine of E-Sagila, and then
proceeded to issue decrees. Next Marduk assigns seats to the Seven
Gods of Fate and to Enlil and Anu, and then he lays up in E-Sagila the
famous bow which he bore during his fight against Tiâmat. When the
text again becomes connected we find the gods singing a hymn of praise
to Marduk.]

94. "Whatever is ... those gods and goddesses shall bear(?)

95. "They shall never forget, they shall cleave to the god (?)

96. "... they shall make bright, they shall make shrines.

97. "Verily, the decision (concerning) the Black-headed [belongeth to]
the gods

98. "... all our names have they called, he (Marduk) is most holy
(_elli_)

99. "... they proclaimed and venerated (?) his names.

100. "His ... is exceedingly bright, his work is ...

101. "Marduk, whose father Anu proclaimed [his name] from his birth,

102. "Who hath set the day at his door ... his going,

103. "By whose help the storm wind was bound ...

104. "Delivered the gods his fathers in the time of trouble.

105. "Verily, the gods have proclaimed his sonship.

106. "In his bright light let them walk for ever.

107. "[On] men whom he hath formed, the created things fashioned by
his fingers

108. "He hath imposed the service of the gods, and them he hath set
free

109. "...

110. "... they looked at him,

111. "[He is] the far-seeing _(maruku)_ god, verily ...

112. "Who hath made glad the hearts of the Anunnaki, who hath made
them to ...

113. "The god Marudukku--verily, he is the object of trust of his
country ...

114. "Let men praise him ...

115. "The 'King of the Protecting Heart,' (?), hath arisen and hath
[bound] the Serpent ...

116. "Broad is his heart, mighty [his] belly.

117. "King of the gods of heaven and of earth, whose name our company
hath proclaimed,

118. "We will fulfil (?) the utterance of his mouth. Over his fathers
the gods,

119. "Yea, [over] the gods of heaven and earth, all of them,

120. "His kingship [we will exalt].

121. "[We] will look unto the King of all the heaven and the earth at
night when the place of all the gods is darkness (literally sadness).

122. "He hath assigned our dwelling in heaven and in earth in the time
of trouble,

123. "He hath allotted stations to the Igigi and the Anunnaki.

124. "The gods themselves are magnified by his name; may he direct
their sanctuaries.

125. "ASAR-LU-DUG, is his name by which his father Anu hath named him.

126. "Verily, he is the light of the gods, the mighty ...

127. "Who ... all the parts of heaven and of the land

128. "By a mighty combat he saved our dwelling in the time of trouble.

129. "ASAR-LU-DUG, the god who made him (i.e. man) to live, did
the god ... call him in the second place

130. "[And] the gods who had been formed, whom he fashioned as though
[they were] his offspring.

131. "He is the Lord who hath made all the gods to live by his holy
mouth."

[Lines 132-139 are too fragmentary to translate, but it is clear from
the text that remains that Lakhmu, and Lakhamu, and Anshar all
proclaimed the names of Marduk. When the text again becomes connected
Marduk has just been addressing the gods.]

140. In Up-shukkinaku[1] he appointed their council for them.

[Footnote 1: From this text it seems clear that Up-shukkinaku was the
name of a chamber in the temple of E-Sagila. This name probably means
the "chamber of the shakkanaku," i.e., the chamber in which the
governor of the city (_shakkanaku_) went annually to embrace the
hands of the god Bel-Marduk, from whom he thereby received the right
of sovereignty over the country.]

141. [They said]:--"Of [our] son, the Hero, our Avenger,

142. "We will exalt the name by our speech."

143. They sat down and in their assembly they proclaimed his rank.

144. Every one of them pronounced his name in the sanctuary.



SEVENTH TABLET.

1. O ASARI,--giver of plantations, appointer of sowing time,

2. Who dost make grain and fibrous plants, who makest garden herbs to
spring up.

3. O ASARU-ALIM--who art weighty in the council-chamber, who art
fertile in counsel,

4. To whom the gods pay worship (?) reverent ...

5. O ASARU-ALIM-NUNA--the adored light of the Father who begat him,

6. Who makest straight the direction of Anu, Bel, [and Ea].[1]

[Footnote 1: This line seems to imply that Marduk was regarded as the
instructor of the "old" gods; the allusion is, probably, to the "ways"
of Anu, Bel and Ea, which are treated as technical terms in
astrology.]

7. He is their patron who fixed [their] ...

8. Whose drink is abundance, who goeth forth ...

9. O TUTU--creator of their new life,

10. Supplier of their wants, that they may be satisfied [or, glad],

11. Let but [Tutu] recite an incantation, the gods shall be at rest;

12. Let but [the gods] attack him (i.e., Tutu) in wrath, he
shall resist them successfully;

13. Let him be raised up on a high throne in the assembly
of the gods....

14. None among the gods is like unto him.

15. O god TUTU, who art the god ZI-UKKINA, life of the host of the
gods,

16. Who stablished the shining heavens for the gods,

17. He founded their paths, he fixed [their courses].

18. Never shall his deeds be forgotten among men.

19. O god TUTU, who art ZI-AZAG, was the third name they gave
him--holder (i.e., possessor) of holiness,

20. God of the favourable wind, lord of adoration and grace,

21. Creator of fulness and abundance, stablisher of plenty,

22. Who turneth that which is little into that which is much.

23. In sore straits we have felt his favouring breeze.

24. Let them (the gods) declare, let them magnify, let them sing his
praises.

25. O TUTU, who art the god AGA-AZAG in the fourth place--let men
exult.

26. Lord of the holy incantation, who maketh the dead to live,

27. He felt compassion for the gods who were in captivity.

28. He riveted on the gods his enemies the yoke which had been resting
on them.

29. In mercy towards them he created mankind,

30. The Merciful One in whose power it is to give life.

31. His words shall endure for ever, they shall never be forgotten,

32. In the mouth of the Black-headed[1] whom his hands have made.

[Footnote 1: Here the title "Black-headed" refers to all mankind, but
it is sometimes used by the scribes to distinguish the population of
the Euphrates Valley from foreign peoples of light complexions.]

33. O God TUTU, who art the god MU-AZAG in the fifth place--let their
mouth recite a holy incantation [to him],

34. Who by his own holy incantation hath destroyed all the evil ones.

[Illustration: Portion of a tablet inscribed in Assyrian with a text
of the Seventh Tablet of the Creation Series. [K. 8522.]]

35. O god SHAZU, the wise heart of the gods, who searchest the inward
parts of the belly,

36. Who dost not permit the worker of evil to go forth by his side,

37. Establisher of the company of the gods ... their hearts.

38. Reducer of the disobedient ...

[Lines 39-106 are wanting. The positions of the fragmentary lines
supplied by duplicate fragments are uncertain; in any case they give
no connected sense.]

107. Verily, he holdeth the beginning and the end of them,[1]
verily ...

[Footnote 1: Compare the language of the Kur'ân (Surah II, v. 256),
"He (Allah) knoweth what is before them and what is behind them."]

108. Saying, "He who entered into the middle of Tiâmat resteth not;

109. "His name shall be 'Nibiru' the seizer of the middle.

110. "He shall set the courses of the stars of the heavens,

111. "He shall herd together the whole company of the gods like sheep.

112. "He shall [ever] take Tiâmat captive, he shall slit up her
treasure (variant, life), he shall disembowel her."[1]

[Footnote 1: These lines suggest that the fight between Marduk and
Tiâmat was recurrent; it is incorrect to translate the verbal forms as
preterites.]

113. Among the men who are to come after a lapse of time,

114. Let [these words] be heard without ceasing, may they reign to all
eternity,

115. Because he made the [heavenly] places and moulded the stable
[earth].

116. Father Bel proclaimed his name, "Lord of the Lands."

117. All the Igigi repeated the title.

118. Ea heard and his liver rejoiced,

119. Saying, "He whose title hath rejoiced his fathers

120. "Shall be even as I am; his name shall be Ea.

121. "He shall dispose of all the magical benefits of my rites,

122. "He shall make to have effect my instructions."

123. By the title of "Fifty times" the great gods

124. Proclaimed his names fifty times, they magnified his going.



EPILOGUE.

125. Let the first comer take them and repeat them;

126. Let the wise man and the learned man meditate upon all of them;

127. The father shall repeat them to his son that he may lay hold upon
them.

128. Let them (i.e., the names) open the ears of the shepherd and the
herdsman.[1]

[Footnote 1: "To open the ears"--to give understanding.]

129. Let [man] rejoice in Marduk, the Lord of the Gods,

130. That his land may be fertile and he himself abide in security.

131. His word is true, his command altereth not.

132. No god hath ever brought to the ground that which issueth from
his mouth.

133. They (i.e., the gods) treated him with contempt, he turned
not his back [in flight],

134. No god could resist his wrath at its height.

135. His heart is large, his bowels of mercy are great.

136. Of sin and wickedness before him ...

137. The first comer utters his complaint of humiliation before him.

[Lines 138-142 are too fragmentary to translate.]



NOTES.

1. There are in the British Museum several fragments of Neo-Babylonian
copies of the Seven Tablets of Creation, the exact position of which is
at present uncertain. One of these (S. 2013) is of some importance
because it speaks of one object which was in the "upper Tiâmat", and of
another which was in the "lower Tiâmat". This shows that the Babylonians
thought that one half of the body of Tiâmat, which was split up by
Marduk, was made into the celestial ocean, and the other half into the
terrestrial ocean, in other words, into "the waters that were above" and
"the waters that were beneath" the firmament respectively.

2. When George Smith published his _Chaldean Account of Genesis_
in 1876, he was of opinion that the Creation Tablets in the British
Museum contained descriptions of the Temptation of Eve by the serpent
and of the building and overthrow of the Tower of Babel.  The
description of Paradise in Genesis ii seems to show traces of
Babylonian influence, and the cylinder seal, Brit. Mus. No. 89,326,
was thought to be proof that a Babylonian legend of the Temptation
existed. In fact, George Smith printed a copy of the seal in his book
(p. 91). But it is now known that the tablet which was believed to
refer to man's eating of the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge (K. 3, 473
+ 79-7-8, 296 + R. 615) describes the banquet of the gods to which
they invited Marduk. In like manner the text on K. 3657, which Smith
thought referred to the Tower of Babel, is now known to contain no
mention of a tower or building of any sort. It was also thought by him
that K. 3364 contained a set of instructions which God gave to Adam
and Eve after their creation, but it is now known and admitted by all
Assyriologists that the text on this tablet contains moral precepts
and has nothing to do with the Creation Series. Enquiries are from
time to time made at the Museum for tablets which deal with the
Temptation of Eve, and the destruction of the Tower of Babel, and the
Divine commands to Adam and Eve; it is perhaps not superfluous to say
that nothing of the kind exists.



LIST OF THE NAMES OF THE STARS OR SIGNS OF THE ZODIAC, WITH A LIST
SHOWING THE MONTH THAT WAS ASSOCIATED WITH EACH STAR IN THE PERSIAN
PERIOD.

BY SIDNEY SMITH, M.A., and C.J. GADD, M.A., Assistants in the Department.

No. 77,821 (85-4-30, 15).

       Determinative                                    Modern
Month.    of Star.    Name of the Sign of the Zodiac. Equivalent

[Cuneiform]                                           Goat.
[Cuneiform]                                           Bull.

[Cuneiform]                                           Twins.
[Cuneiform]                                           Crab.
[Cuneiform]                                           Lion.
[Cuneiform]                                           Virgin.
[Cuneiform]                                           Scales.
[Cuneiform]                                           Scorpion.
[Cuneiform]                                           Bow.
[Cuneiform]                                           Capricornus
[Cuneiform]                                           Water-bearer
[Cuneiform]                                           The Fishes.

Month.
|
|  Determinative of Star.
|  |
|  |          Name of the Sign on the Zodiac.
|  |          |
|  |          |
|  |          |
|  |          TRANSLITERATION.
|  |                TRANSLATION.
|  |
1  Nisannu    (kakkab) (amel) Agru....
                    The Labourer.

2  Airu          "     Kakkab u (kakkab) Alap shame
                    The Star and the Bull of heaven.

3  Simanu         "    Re'u kinu shame u (kakkab) tu'ame rabuti
                    The faithful shepherd of heaven and the Great Twins.

4  Duuzu          "    AL.LUL. (shittu)[1]....
                    The Tortoise.

5  Abu            "    Kalbu rabu....
                    Great Dog (Lion).

6  Ululu          "    Shiru....
                    Virgin with ear of corn.

7  Tashritum      "    Zibanitum....
                    ....

8  Arah shamna    "    Akrabu....
                    The Scorpion.

9  Kislimu        "    PA.BIL.SAG....
                    Enurta (the god).

10 Tebetum        "    SUHUR.MASH....
                    The Goat-fish.

11 Shabatu        "    Gula....
                    The Great Star

12 Addaru         "    DIL.GAN.u rikis nuni
                    The star ... and the Band of Fishes.

[Footnote 1: The Egyptian Sheta]


I have been assisted in the preparation of this monograph by
Mr. Sidney Smith, M.A., Assistant in the Department.

E.A. WALLIS BUDGE.

DEPARTMENT OF EGYPTIAN AND ASSYRIAN ANTIQUITIES, BRITISH MUSEUM.
_June_ 1, 1921.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Babylonian Legends of the Creation, by 
British Museum

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BABYLONIAN LEGENDS OF THE CREATION ***

***** This file should be named 9914-8.txt or 9914-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/9/1/9914/

Produced by the PG Distributed Proofreaders

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Maternity, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Maternity
       Letters from Working-Women

Author: Various

Editor: The Women's Co-operative Guild

Release Date: September 29, 2015 [EBook #50077]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MATERNITY ***




Produced by Henry Flower and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)









Transcriber's Note

Bold text is indicated by ~swung dashes~, and italics by _underscores_.




  MATERNITY

  LETTERS FROM WORKING-WOMEN




  ~ROUND ABOUT A POUND A WEEK.~ By Mrs. PEMBER REEVES. 2s. 6d. net.

  “The best piece of social study published in England for many
  years.”--_Manchester Guardian._

  “If you would know why men become anarchists, why agitators foam at
  the mouth, and demagogues break out into seditious language--here
  is a little book that will tell you as soberly, as quietly, and as
  convincingly as any book that has yet come from the press.”--Mr.
  HAROLD BEGBIE in the _Daily Chronicle_.


  ~THE FEEDING OF SCHOOL CHILDREN.~ By M. E. BULKLEY, of the London
  School of Economics. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d. net.

  “The first comprehensive description of one of the most momentous
  social experiments of modern times.”--_Economic Review._

  “An admirable statement of the history and present position of the
  problem.”--_New Statesman._


  LONDON: G. BELL AND SONS, LTD.,

  YORK HOUSE, PORTUGAL STREET, KINGSWAY, W.C.

  NEW YORK: THE MACMILLAN CO.
  BOMBAY: A. H. WHEELER AND CO.

[Illustration: AN ANNUAL CONGRESS OF THE WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVE GUILD.]




  MATERNITY

  LETTERS
  FROM WORKING-WOMEN

  COLLECTED BY

  THE WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVE GUILD

  WITH A PREFACE BY

  THE RIGHT HON. HERBERT SAMUEL, M.P.

  HIS MAJESTY’S POSTMASTER-GENERAL
  LATE PRESIDENT OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD

  [Illustration]

  LONDON
  G. BELL AND SONS, LTD.
  1915




PREFACE

BY THE RIGHT HON. HERBERT SAMUEL, M.P.


These letters give an intimate picture of the difficulties, the
troubles, often the miseries, sometimes the agonies, that afflict many
millions of our people, as a consequence of normal functions of their
lives. An unwise reticence has prevented the public mind from realising
that maternity, among the poorer classes, presents a whole series of
urgent social problems. These letters give the facts. It is the first
time, I believe, that the facts have been stated, not by medical men or
social students, but by the sufferers themselves, in their own words.
The Women’s Co-operative Guild, unresting in their efforts for the
improvement of the conditions of working women, have rendered a most
useful service in eliciting these letters and in making them public.

It is necessary to take action to solve the problems that here stand
revealed, first for the elementary reason that a nation ought not to
tolerate widespread suffering among its members, if there are measures
by which that suffering can be obviated without indirectly causing
worse. “Woman,” says Kant, “is an end in herself, and not merely a
means to an end.” Apart from all question of social advantage, her
claim for help for her own sake, when she needs help to meet the
difficulties special to herself, is as valid as any other claim--as the
claim of the sick man, for his own sake, to be cured, as the claim of
the child, for his own sake, to be protected and to be taught.

Action is necessary also because, for the lack of it, the nation is
weakened. Numbers are of importance. In the competition and conflict of
civilisations it is the mass of the nations that tells. Again and again
in history a lofty and brilliant civilisation embodied in a small State
has been borne under by the weight of a larger State of a lower type.
The ideas for which Britain stands can only prevail so long as they
are backed by a sufficient mass of numbers. It is not enough to make
our civilisation good. It must also be made strong; and for strength,
numbers are not indeed enough without other elements, but they are none
the less essential. Under existing conditions we waste, before birth
and in infancy, a large part of our possible population.

How quickly some social evils will yield to treatment is seen in the
fact that in ten years the campaign against infant mortality has
reduced the death-rate among infants under one year of age by nearly
a third. But it is still very excessive. It is not race or climate or
the irreducible minimum of physical defect which accounts for a large
part at least of the present infant death-rate. In the same towns,
among people of the same stock, twice, sometimes three times, as many
infants, in proportion to the number born, will die in the wards where
the poorer classes live as die in the wards where the well-to-do
live. The excess is mainly due to ignorance, to malnutrition, to all
the noxious influences that go with poverty. Not nature, but social
conditions, are to blame for the evil. Therefore it is remediable.

The time is past when a shallow application of the doctrine of
evolution led people to acquiesce in a high infant death-rate. It was
thought that it meant merely the killing off of the weak, leading to
the survival of the fittest, and that the process, cruel in its method,
was beneficent in its end. There are few now who do not see that the
high death-rate is due, in large measure, to a bad environment; and
that by keeping a bad environment you produce unfitness. You partly
remedy the evil, it is true, by destroying a large number of lives
which have been made unfit to survive; but you leave, as a clog on the
community, numbers of others not killed but weakened. The conditions
that kill also maim.

The theory, too, is passing away that the country is over-full and that
the danger to be feared is not a lack of population but its excess.
Because many districts are overcrowded, it does not follow that these
islands as a whole are over-populated. So long as food supplies can be
relied upon from oversea, it is difficult to set limits to the numbers
that, under sound social conditions, this country can maintain.

The conclusion is clear that it is the duty of the community, so far as
it can, to relieve motherhood of its burdens, to spread the knowledge
of mothercraft that is so often lacking, to make medical aid available
when it is needed, to watch over the health of the infant. And since
this is the duty of the community, it is also the duty of the State.
The infant cannot, indeed, be saved by the State. It can only be saved
by the mother. But the mother can be helped and can be taught by the
State.

The local health authorities have large powers, and some already are
eager to use them. As President of the Local Government Board I was
able to submit to them a comprehensive scheme of assistance to mothers
in pregnancy, in confinement, and in the care of the infants, and to
offer, to such as chose to adopt it, a Treasury grant of one-half of
the modest expenditure involved. The need at the moment is to create
among the local councillors and their electors a body of opinion
which will secure the adoption of this scheme and its administration
on effective lines. Because I believe it will conduce to that end, I
commend this book the more readily.




CONTENTS


                                                              PAGE
  PREFACE BY THE RIGHT HON. HERBERT SAMUEL, M.P.                 V

  INTRODUCTION                                                   1
  LETTERS FROM WORKING-WOMEN                                    18
  METHOD OF INQUIRY                                            191
  OCCUPATIONS OF HUSBANDS                                      192
  FIGURES BEARING ON INFANT MORTALITY                          194
  LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD MEMORANDUM, JULY, 1914                196
  SUMMARY OF THE NOTIFICATION OF BIRTHS (EXTENSION) ACT, 1915  198
  LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD CIRCULAR, JULY, 1915                  200
  ADMINISTRATIVE POWERS OF LOCAL AUTHORITIES                   207
  NATIONAL SCHEME PROPOSED BY THE WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVE GUILD   209




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS AND FACSIMILES


                                                              PAGE
  A GUILD CONGRESS                                  _Frontispiece_
  FACSIMILE OF LETTER 24                                        51
  A FAMILY OF ELEVEN CHILDREN                          _Facing_ 58
  FACSIMILE OF LETTER 36                                        63
  FACSIMILE OF LETTER 106                                      139
  A FAMILY OF FOUR OUT OF FIFTEEN CHILDREN            _Facing_ 110
  BRADFORD MUNICIPAL INFANT HOSPITAL                  _Facing_ 190




MATERNITY

LETTERS FROM WORKING-WOMEN




INTRODUCTION


The whole point of this book lies in the letters which it contains; and
it might therefore have seemed advisable to leave the reader untroubled
by an introduction to gather that point from the letters themselves.
The material is, however, in form and in subject of so unusual a kind
that it has been thought necessary to explain something of its origin
and its authors, and even to touch upon some of the problems which the
letters so vividly show to exist. The letters are written by married
women of the working-class, all of whom are or have been officials
of the Women’s Co-operative Guild. The Guild is a self-governing
organisation within the Co-operative Movement, and deals with subjects
which affect the Co-operative Movement and the position of married
women in the home and the state. It might justly claim to speak with
greater authority than any other body for the voteless and voiceless
millions of married working-women of England, for it has a membership
of nearly 32,000, distributed in 611 branches over the whole country.

The Guild has for several years given special attention to the subject
of “The National Care of Maternity.” Before the Insurance Bill was
introduced, the Guild asked for the inclusion of Maternity benefit,
and when the Amending Bill was before the House in 1913, an agitation
by the Guild secured the benefit as the mother’s own property. Later on
it placed a scheme for the national care of Maternity before the Local
Government Board, which issued a Circular on July 30, 1914, largely
embodying the various suggestions of the Guild. In the course of this
work it was considered advisable to obtain information from the members
themselves of the conditions under which they had brought children into
the world. These letters are the result. The barest indication of the
information wanted was given, and the only questions used were those on
p. 191, as it was thought that it would be more valuable to allow the
women to tell their own story in their own way.

We claim for these letters that for the first time are presented in
them the real problems of Maternity seen through the women’s own
account of their lives. If the writers are uneducated in the ordinary
sense of school and university, a long schooling in life and suffering
has given them a peculiar simplicity and dignity of language in place
of the more usual literary style. The letters are left exactly as
written by the women, the only alterations made being in the spelling,
in the addition of punctuation, and in the omission of a few medical
details. All names and places have also been omitted in order to
prevent identification.

The women are the wives of men who earn their daily bread by manual
labour. The husband’s trades cover over one hundred different
occupations, and their rates of wages vary from 11s. to £5. The letters
show how often the nominal wages are reduced by periods of short time
and unemployment, such periods constantly coinciding with childbirth.
It should also be remembered that a wife does not usually receive the
whole of the weekly wage for her family expenditure.

The earnings and conditions of life of these men are certainly above
rather than below the level of their class. It is true on the whole
to say that the Co-operative Movement is largely composed of the
better-paid manual workers, and there is no doubt that the woman who is
secretary of a Guild branch lives in better conditions than the average
working woman. If the conditions of their lives are as described in
these letters, the suffering and waste of life, the overwork and
poverty, must be tenfold and twentyfold where wages are less and
employment more precarious. That the women themselves are well aware
of this is shown by the occurrence in the letters of such sentences as
“I was more fortunately placed than most women,” or “I have not had to
go through so much pain and suffering as many poor mothers have to go
through.”

These letters then give for the first time in their own words the
working woman’s view of her life in relation to maternity. Now, what
is the general impression that the reader gets of the life at such
times of these more fortunate working-class mothers? It is on the
whole an impression of perpetual overwork, illness, and suffering.
The stories and records of 400 lives have been received, taken at
random out of the million similar lives lived in our cities. In this
book 160 letters have been published, and the unpublished letters
describe similar experiences. The evidence of such witnesses cannot
be impugned; it is that to bear children under such conditions is to
bear an intolerable burden of suffering. The cry of a woman in travail
has become a commonplace of literature, and the notion that pain and
motherhood are inevitably connected has become so fixed that the world
is shocked if a woman does not consider the pain as much a privilege
as the motherhood. And this attitude of the world towards the pain of
travail has been extended to all the sufferings attending motherhood.
These letters show that this is the view of women themselves, for which
doctors have been largely responsible. It is hardly too much to say
that the ordinary professional attitude might have been summed up in
the saying, “You’ll be worse before you’re better.” It would be foolish
to cry aloud against the inevitable minimum of maternal suffering. And
it is to be noted that there is no foolish note of self-pity in these
letters. The brave words, combined with a stoic resignation to fate,
the invincible optimism shown in such letters as Nos. 33 and 47, are
characteristic of the spirit of them all. But if it be folly to kick
against Nature’s pricks, what is more foolish is the facile fatalism
with which we resign ourselves and other people to unnecessary and
useless suffering. And a very short consideration of the suffering
disclosed in these letters will show that it is both unnecessary and
useless.

The roots of the evil lie in the conditions of life which our
industrial system forces upon the wage-earners. It is useful to
consider the different conditions under which the middle-class and
the working-class woman becomes a mother. The middle-class wife
from the first moment is within reach of medical advice which can
alleviate distressing illness and confinements and often prevent future
ill-health or death. During the months of pregnancy she is not called
upon to work; she is well fed; she is able to take the necessary rest
and exercise. At the time of the birth she will have the constant
attendance of doctor and nurse, and she will remain in bed until she is
well enough to get up. For a woman of the middle class to be deprived
of any one of these things would be considered an outrage. Now, a
working-class woman is habitually deprived of them all. She is lucky
if her husband hands her over regularly each week 25s. with which to
provide a house, food, and clothing, for the whole family. It has to be
remembered that the ordinary family wage leaves nothing over for the
additional outlay upon maternity. This ought to amount to £5 if the
expenses are properly met. Too poor to obtain medical advice during
the months of pregnancy, she “learns by experience and ignorance,”
comforting herself with the belief that however ill she be it is only
“natural.” Meanwhile she has to scrape and save to put by money for the
inevitable expenses that lie before her. She often goes out to char
or sits at her sewing machine, to scrape together a few shillings.
She puts by in money-boxes; she lays in little stores of tea, soap,
oatmeal and other dry goods. At a time when she ought to be well fed
she stints herself in order to save; for in a working-class home if
there is saving to be done, it is not the husband and children, but the
mother who makes her meal off the scraps which remain over, or “plays
with meat-less bones.” One woman writes: “I can assure you I have told
my husband many times that I had had my dinner before he came in, so as
there should be plenty to go round for the children and himself, but he
found me out somehow, so that was stopped.” Another woman says: “Many a
time I have had bread and dripping for my dinner before my husband came
home, and said I had my dinner, as I would not wait.”

If the mother is not working long hours in a factory, she is working
even longer hours in her own home.

Writers on infant mortality and the decline of the birth-rate never
tire of justly pointing to the evils which come from the strain
of manual labour in factories for expectant mothers. Very little
is ever said about the same evils which come from the incessant
drudgery of domestic labour. People forget that the unpaid work of the
working-woman at the stove, at scrubbing and cleaning, at the washtub,
in lifting and carrying heavy weights, is just as severe manual labour
as many industrial operations in factories. It is this labour which the
mother performs often up to the very day on which the child is born,
and she will be at it again perhaps six or eight days afterwards. The
Factory Acts make it an offence for an employer knowingly to employ
a woman within four weeks after confinement. “In Switzerland a total
absence from employment in factories of women during eight weeks before
and after childbirth must be observed, and on their return to work
proof must be tendered of an absence since the birth of the child of
at least six weeks.” In Germany four weeks’ absence is compulsory,
and “must be extended to six weeks unless a medical certificate is
furnished approving of employment at the end of four weeks.”

We propose to deal now shortly with the causes of those conditions,
then with the results, and finally with the methods of cure and
prevention of the resulting evils. The main causes seem to be three:

  (1) Inadequate wages.

  (2) Lack of knowledge regarding maternity and of skilled advice and
  treatment.

  (3) The personal relation of husband and wife.

We have already dealt to some extent with the first cause. Thirty
shillings a week for a manual worker is reckoned to be “good wages,”
and there are, of course, thousands of men earning far less than that.
Now, what most people do not realise is that 30s. a week is itself a
wage utterly inadequate for rearing a large or even small family. It
is inadequate because the whole burden is placed upon the woman who
has to bring up a family on 30s., and that burden is excessive. She can
only do it at all by incessant labour which inevitably cuts her off
from every higher human activity except one. That one which is left to
her is maternal affection, and the wonder is that even that endures as
it does the strain of poverty, overwork, and illness.

The second cause, the lack of knowledge on the part of the women,
receives remarkable testimony in these letters. Again and again the
writers come back to this subject. They are convinced of the evils that
resulted to themselves and their children from their own ignorance of
the functions and duties of motherhood. And there can be no doubt that
they are right. Much of the suffering entailed in maternity, much of
the damage to the life and health of women and children, would be got
rid of if women married with some knowledge of what lay before them,
and if they could obtain medical advice and supervision during the time
of pregnancy and motherhood. It is not the women’s fault that they are
ignorant, for the possibilities of knowledge have not been within their
reach.

The personal relation of husband and wife is a subject as difficult
as it is delicate. Reading these letters one is often struck by
the fact that that relation remains so good under the most adverse
circumstances. But despite the extraordinary loyalty of the writers,
there is clearly a consciousness among them that the position of a
woman not only impairs the value of that relationship, but is directly
responsible for some of the evils we are considering. In plain
language, both in law and in popular morality, the wife is still the
inferior in the family to the husband. She is first without economic
independence, and the law therefore gives the man, whether he be
good or bad, a terrible power over her. Partly for this reason, and
partly because all sorts of old half-civilised beliefs still cling to
the flimsy skirts of our civilisation, the beginning and end of the
working woman’s life and duty is still regarded by many as the care of
the household, the satisfaction of man’s desires, and the bearing of
children. We do not say that this is the case in every working-class
home, or that there are not hundreds of husbands who take a higher view
of married life and practise it. What we do say is that these views
are widely held, often unconsciously, and are taken advantage of by
hundreds of men who are neither good men nor good husbands and that
even where there is no deliberate evil or viciousness, these views are
responsible for the overwork and physical suffering among women and for
that excessive child-bearing, of which more will be said later.

The effects of the conditions we have described and of the causes
which produce them can be conveniently grouped under three heads.
They concern, first the woman herself, secondly the children borne
by her, thirdly the children that remain unborn of her. So far we
have deliberately insisted only upon the evil effects upon the women
themselves, and it still remains to insist upon them. The disastrous
results of maternal ill-health and overwork upon the children cannot
be exaggerated, but in the contemplation of them, people are too apt
to forget that the mother herself is an individual with the right to
“equality of opportunity,” which is the right as a human being to be
given the opportunity of understanding and enjoying those things which
alone make life tolerable to humanity.

It was perhaps inevitable that the mother should have been publicly
overlooked, for the isolation of women in married life has, up to now,
prevented any common expression of their needs. They have been hidden
behind the curtain which falls after marriage, the curtain which women
are now themselves raising.

The general effect upon women is the useless suffering inflicted upon
them, and one of the chief causes of this is undoubtedly excessive
childbearing. This evil is directly due to those semi-civilised notions
which were touched upon above, and though, as we shall see when we
deal with the decline of the birth-rate, nature is taking her own way
of reacting against it, it still exists. We would draw attention to
the conditions disclosed in such letters as 1, 20, 36, and 71. In the
first case we find a woman married at nineteen having 11 children and
2 miscarriages in 20 years, her husband’s wages being 20s. a week. In
the second case there are 5 children and one miscarriage in 9 years;
in the third 5 children and 5 miscarriages in 12-1/2 years; and in
the fourth 9 children and 1 miscarriage in 24 years. These cases
have been taken more or less at random, and nothing could be more
significant than the bare fact that out of 386 women who have written
these letters, 348 have had 1,396 live children, 83 still-births,
and 218 miscarriages. These figures speak for themselves: the mere
physical strain of pregnancy and childbirth succeeding each other with
scarcely an interval for ten or twenty years renders a healthy bodily
and intellectual life impossible. And when the additional strain of
insufficient means and incessant labour are added, the suffering which
becomes the daily concomitant of life is unimaginable to those who are
born in the more fortunate classes of society.

If any further evidence is wanted of the direct effect of such
conditions upon the health of women, we would draw attention to the
number of miscarriages and still-births. It is probable that not all
the writers have included miscarriages; but even as it is the number
of miscarriages is 15·4 per cent. of the live births, while the
number of still-births is 5·9 per cent. Taken together, these figures
show a pre-natal death-rate of 21·3 per 100 live births, as against a
national infant death-rate of 10·9. According to some medical writers
the frequency of abortions “is believed to be about 20 or 25 per
cent. of all pregnancies”; while Dr. Amand Routh estimates that the
number of deaths during pregnancy probably equals the number of deaths
in the first year after birth. The following letters are a pathetic
endorsement of the view that fatigue, strain, and domestic conditions
are responsible for large numbers of miscarriages, and point to the
urgent need of pre-natal care.

We have now come by a logical sequence from a consideration of the
effect of the conditions of women’s lives upon themselves to the
further effect upon the life and death of their offspring. We have, in
fact, travelled the same road as, but in the opposite direction from,
those who in the last ten years have conducted the campaign against
Infant Mortality. It was about ten or twelve years ago that many people
were suddenly horrified to learn that out of every 1,000 children born
in England and Wales, about 150 died before they have lived twelve
months. A vigorous campaign against Infant Mortality by means largely
of what is called Infant Welfare work followed. Government departments
and private persons and organisations have co-operated with such
success that the death-rate of infants under one year of age per 1,000
births has fallen from 145 in 1904 to 109 in 1913. But the point which,
for our present purpose, is most illuminating is to note the course
which that campaign has pursued and is pursuing. It has become more
and more clear that if you wish to guard the health of the infant,
you must go back from it to the mother; it is the circumstances
of the mother--her health, her knowledge, her education, and her
habits--before the child is born no less than at the time of and after
birth, that again and again determine whether the child is to have
health or disease, to live or to die. In fact, from whatever point you
regard the question, the words of the writer of letter 63 are true: We
shall not get “a race in the future worthy of England until the nation
wakes up to the needs of the mothers of that future race.”

Infant mortality in the first year of life is still appallingly
high, and there is good reason for believing--though the fact cannot
be absolutely proved--that this high rate is very largely due to
the circumstances in which the great mass of working-class women
are obliged to bear children. As is well known, it is in the first
month after birth that the death-rate is highest, and it is this
rate which reformers have been least successful in reducing. Now, if
the causes of deaths of infants in the first four weeks of life are
examined, an enormous proportion are due to “immaturity.” “It needs
no argument,” says Dr. A. K. Chalmers, “to show that until we have a
clearer conception of the causes which lead to death from immaturity,
we cannot but fail to make any considerable impression on the volume
of deaths which occur during this period of infant life.” But as a
matter of fact there is high authority for debiting the greater number
of these deaths from immaturity to the physical health and condition
of the mother. “It is evident,” writes Sir George Newman, “that if
infants die within a few days or hours of birth, or even if dying
later show unmistakable signs of being unequal to the calls of bare
physical existence, that there must be something more than external
conditions or food or management which is working to their hurt. The
explanation is clearly to be found in ante-natal conditions.” Dr. Noel
Paton considers that the “malnutrition of the mother helps to explain
the very high infant mortality among the very poor. The infant starts
life at a low level, and readily succumbs to the hardships to which
it is too often subjected.” Dr. Ashby writes: “My own experience in
the out-patient room entirely confirms the opinion that nutrition of
the mother has a very important bearing on the nutrition of the fœtus,
and that the statement that the percentage of unhealthy births among
the poor is small is not justified by facts. We constantly see fully
developed infants a day or two old ... clearly ill-fitted, as the event
proves, to withstand the conditions of external existence.... There
is no question of syphilis; they are the children of poor mothers who
have lived hard lives of wear and tear during pregnancy, are themselves
badly nourished and weakly, and have felt the pinch of poverty, though
often perhaps poverty of the secondary sort.”

No better comment upon, or illustration of, these opinions of experts
could be found than the facts contained in these letters. You can
read in them the little details of existence which made the writers
“mothers who have lived hard lives of wear and tear during pregnancy,”
and watching those details you can see how the everyday working of
the machine, which we call industry and society, leads to suffering,
and wastes and destroys human life as soon as it is born. The results
which can already be shown of care in the pre-natal period, bear out
the contention that the suffering and loss of life which exists is
unnecessary. The Women’s Municipal League in Boston, U.S.A., has had
1,512 women in five years (1910-1914) under its care. Amongst these
women there have been no miscarriages in the last three and a half
years; there were 60 cases of threatened eclampsia in the first year,
there were only 2 in the last year; and the total number of infant
deaths under one month was 2 per cent., while Boston’s rate was 4·3 per
cent. The Johns Hopkins Hospital, U.S.A., obtained similar results, and
in the Glasgow Maternity hospital more exact methods have reduced the
infant mortality and morbidity.

If the problems raised by these letters throw light upon the terrible
waste of women’s health and infant life, they no less certainly throw
light upon another phenomenon of modern society--the decline of the
birth-rate.

One of the most remarkable and important signs of change in the
habits and aspirations of society, has been the sudden decline in the
birth-rate which, noticeable in many countries, began in this country
about forty years ago, and has continued steadily down to the present
time. In every locality and class the number of children born yearly to
married women is declining, but the fall is not the same everywhere;
in the industrial population it is greater among the better-class
and better-paid workers, and it is distinctly greatest among textile
workers where wages are comparatively high and a large proportion
of women work in factories. Now, it is absolutely certain that this
decline is mainly due to the deliberate limitation of the family. There
is, of course, a wide divergence of opinion as to the result of this
conscious check upon the growth of population; some regard it as the
clearest solution of the inextricable tangle in which the industrial
system has enmeshed humanity, others see in it the suicide of a nation
and the doom of a race. But people are so anxious to dispute about
the good and evil of its effect that they often fail to see that for
society itself the important good and evil lie in the conditions which
cause the phenomenon. For the State it may be vital to know the result
of men and women refusing to give her citizens; but it is still more
vital for her to recognize the conditions within her which are leading
men and women to this refusal.

These letters give the skeletons of individuals’ lives, and individual
thoughts and feelings; but in those facts and thoughts and feelings one
can see clearly the general mould of life and the sweep of the current
of general opinion which is among the working classes, resulting in
the refusal to have children. There is a kind of strike against large
families, and it is not, among the workers, a selfish strike. The
motives of this strike are admirably given in the following words
from Letter No. 71, the whole of which is very illuminating on this
point: “All the beautiful in motherhood is very nice if one has plenty
to bring up a family on, but what real mother is going to bring a
life into the world to be pushed into the drudgery of the world at
the earliest possible moment?...” The fact that the decline in the
birth-rate is greatest among the better-paid wage-earners is often said
to prove that a growing love of ease and luxury is causing a declining
birth-rate. The words “ease and luxury” are grotesque when applied
to the lives of manual wage-earners. The fact is that the industrial
worker took the first seventy years of last century to learn that
the conditions such as described in these letters make a human and
a humane life impossible alike for the mother and children of large
families. This consciousness has spread slowly and surely during the
last forty years, and, as is natural, it has spread most amongst the
more educated and intelligent workers and those whose wages have given
them at least the opportunity of realising that there are other things
in life besides poverty and work. The numbers of such men and women
will continue to grow who refuse to have children except under two
conditions. Those conditions are that society shall pay its debt to the
manual worker in such a way that his children can be born into a home
where there is something better than bare existence, and that the woman
has the means and the leisure to live a life of her own without which
she is unfit to give life to her children and to direct it during their
most impressionable years.

It is impossible to leave this question without touching upon one point
which crops up occasionally in these letters. Opinions may differ as to
the good or evil of the general limitation of families, but there can
only be agreement upon the evil which results from the use of drugs to
procure abortion. There are many facts which go to prove that the habit
of taking such drugs has spread to an alarming extent in many places
among working women. Several of these letters confirm that conclusion.
The practice is ruinous to the health of women, is more often than not
useless for procuring the object desired, and probably accounts for the
fact that many children are weakly and diseased from birth. But here
again the cause of the evil lies in the conditions which produce it.
Where maternity is only followed by an addition to the daily life of
suffering, want, overwork, and poverty, people will continue to adopt
even the most dangerous, uncertain, and disastrous methods of avoiding
it.

This introduction has been mainly concerned with pointing out certain
evils deeply seated in national life. These evils have their origin
in social conditions, and they touch life at so many points that they
must, if allowed to work unchecked, modify the whole future of the
race and state. There is no sign that society, if left to itself, will
secrete some antitoxin to purge its own blood. The industrial and
capitalist system tends to become continually more industrial and
capitalistic; the gulf between the rich and poor, the fortunate and the
unfortunate widens; ideals become higher and broader while the means
to satisfy them are narrowed in the possession of a narrow class; only
discontent seems to rise while the birth-rate falls. Society cannot
cure itself, and the last hope, therefore, is for the State to attempt
a cure.

The State has first to realise that if it wants citizens, and healthy
citizens, it must make it possible for men and women to have families
while living a full life themselves and giving a full life to their
children. At the present moment this is not possible from top to bottom
of the working class, unless the economic position of the working-class
family be improved. The first requisite is, then, the improvement of
the economic position of the family.

But it is impossible to treat here the broad question of how this can
be attained; it is only possible to deal with the points in which the
State can to-day take immediate steps to improve the economic position
of the working-class family as regards maternity, and bring specialised
knowledge, adequate rest, nourishment and care, medical supervision and
treatment, within reach. And though the story told in these letters,
in the statistics of infant mortality, in the figures of a declining
birth-rate, be dark, a really bright sign for the future is that the
women so vitally concerned have themselves become aware of the evil
and are eagerly demanding that the State shall adopt those measures
which will most surely mitigate or remove it. The Women’s Co-operative
Guild have brought out a scheme which would greatly enlarge the scope
of State action, precisely in those ways in which it has already
proved itself most beneficial. This scheme, which has already to a
large extent received the blessing of the Government Department most
nearly concerned--the Local Government Board--is given in detail on p.
196. Meanwhile, up and down the country the Guild and other women’s
organisations are pressing Public Health Committees to adopt the
measures recommended. The presence of women on Town and County Councils
is another hopeful sign, and it is greatly to be desired that the
numbers of working-women councillors will increase. Dr. Newsholme says:
“Women could help forward the care of maternity and infants by getting
themselves voted on to Local Authorities, and by bringing pertinacious
pressure to bear on members of Local Authorities.”

It should be noted that the essence of the Guild scheme is that
municipal, not philanthropic, action is wanted. It is not charity,
but the united action of the community of citizens which will remove
a widespread social evil. The community is performing a duty, not
bestowing a charity, in providing itself with the bare necessities for
tolerable existence. That is why the end at which the Guild aims is
that the mothers of the country shall find themselves as free to use
a Municipal Maternity Centre as they are to use a Council School or a
Public Library.

The following words of the Chairman of the Bradford Health Committee,
spoken at the opening of the Municipal Maternity Home on March 15,
1915, show that the needs expressed in these letters are beginning
to be met by the methods desired by the writers: “We stand on the
threshold of an age which is to herald the recognition of the mother
and her child, to give public health work that human touch it has
hitherto lacked, and to modify those glaring inequalities in social
life and conditions which are destructive alike of infancy and the
ideals of Christian citizenship.”




LETTERS FROM WORKING-WOMEN.


1. TWENTY YEARS OF CHILD-BEARING.

I shall be very pleased if this letter will be any help to you.
Personally I am quite in sympathy with the new Maternity Scheme. I
do feel I cannot express my feelings enough by letter to say what a
great help it would have been to me, for no one but a mother knows the
struggle and hardships we working women have to go through. I do hope
I shall never see the young women of to-day have to go through what I
did. I am a mother of eleven children--six girls and five boys. I was
only nineteen years old when my first baby was born. My husband was one
of the best and a good father. His earnings was £1 a week; every penny
was given to me, and after paying house rent, firing, and light, and
clubs, that left me 11s. to keep the house going on; and as my little
ones began to come, they wanted providing for and saving up to pay a
nurse, and instead of getting nourishment for myself which we need
at those times, I was obliged to go without. So I had no strength to
stand against it, and instead of being able to rest in bed afterwards,
I was glad to get up and get about again before I was able, because I
could not afford to pay a woman to look after me. I kept on like that
till the sixth little one was expected, and then I had all the other
little ones to see after. The oldest one was only ten years old, so
you see they all wanted a mother’s care. About two months before my
confinement the two youngest fell ill with measles, so I was obliged
to nurse them, and the strain on my nerves brought on brain-fever. All
that the doctor could do for me was to place ice-bags on my head. Oh,
the misery I endured! My poor old mother did what she could for me, and
she was seventy years old, and I could not afford to pay a woman to see
after my home and little ones; but the Lord spared me to get over my
trouble, but I was ill for weeks and was obliged to work before I was
able. Then in another eighteen months I was expecting another. After
that confinement, being so weak, I took a chill, and was laid up for
six months, and neighbours came in and done what they could for me.
Then there was my home and little ones and husband to look after, as he
was obliged to work. It was the worry that kept me from getting better;
if I could have had someone to look after me I should not have been so
ill. After this I had a miscarriage and another babe in one year and
four months. I got on fairly well with the next one, and then the next
one, which was the eighth, I had two down with measles, one two years
old with his collar-bone out, and a little girl thirteen with her arm
broke. That was at the same time as I was expecting my eighth little
one, and my dear husband worried out of life, as you see with all this
trouble I was only having the £1 a week and everything to get out of
it. What a blessing it would have been if this Maternity Scheme was
in go then! It would have saved me a lot of illness and worry, for my
life was a complete misery. For twenty years I was nursing or expecting
babies. No doubt there are others fixed the same way as I have been.
This is only a short account of how I suffered; I could fill sheets of
paper with what I have gone through at confinements and before, and
there are others, no doubt, have felt the pinch as well as myself. If
there is anything else you would like to know and I could tell you, I
should be glad, for the benefit of my sisters.

  _Wages 17s. to 25s.; eleven children, two miscarriages._


2. “OUT OF BED ON THE THIRD DAY.”

I received your paper on Maternity Scheme, and I can assure you it
brought back to me many painful hours of what I have passed through in
twenty-one years of married life. For one thing, I have had a delicate
husband for fifteen years, and I have had nine children, seven born
in nine years. I have only one now; some of the others have died from
weakness from birth. I only had a small wage, as my husband was then
a railway porter. His earnings were 18s. one week and 16s. the next,
and I can say truthfully my children have died from my worrying how to
make two ends meet and also insufficient food. For many of my children
I have not been able to pay a nurse to look after me, and I have got
out of bed on the third day to make my own gruel and fainted away. My
little girl which is just fourteen years old, from the first month of
pregnancy until my nine months were up I attended the hospital and
had a hospital nurse in to confine me.... A woman with little wage
has to go without a great deal at those times, as we must give our
husbands sufficient food or we should have them home and not able to
work; therefore we have to go without to make ends meet. Before my
confinements and after I have always suffered a great deal with bearing
down, and doctors have told me it is weakness, not having enough _good_
food to keep my health during such times. My little girl I have was
under the doctor for seven months, being a weak child born, and I for
one think that if I had a little help from someone I should have had
my children by my side to-day. It has only been through weakness they
have passed away. It is with great pleasure I write this letter to you.
I could say a deal more on sufferings of women if I saw you.

  _Wages 16s. to 18s.; nine children, one still-birth, one miscarriage._


3. HOSPITALS--A CRYING NEED.

A neighbour of mine called in the doctor, who after examining her said
she must be got into a Lying-In Hospital at once, as she was in such a
critical condition. She needed to be under medical care all the time;
the doctor expects when the birth takes place there will be twins. The
woman was taken by cab several miles, and after being there two days
was sent home, as the birth was not expected till March, and this was
about the middle of February; but she was to be taken back by February
27, as she is in such a state that the children will have to be removed
before they attain their full size. A few days after she was home, she
was so ill that her doctor got a cab and sent her to another hospital,
as he said if anything occurred when he was not able to get to her, her
life would be lost. She must be where there were doctors in constant
attendance.

After putting her through an examination and bullying her for going
there, she was informed they had no maternity ward, and sent her home
again, and all the time she was in the greatest of pain and vomiting
blood; she is now at home, and will have to be taken to the first
hospital at the end of the week, if nothing happens before.

Now for her circumstances. Her husband has worked for his present
employer for thirteen years, and earns the magnificent sum of 23s. per
week. The conveying of her to hospitals and back the two times has cost
25s., and the husband had to lose a day and a half. When the foreman
asked the master to allow the man to have his pay for the lost time
owing to the expense he had had, he replied: “He will get 30s. when
the job comes off; let him pay it out of that.” This man is a Church
warden and a prominent Church worker and Christian! The husband’s
fellow-workers who earn no more than him, and some of them less, have
had what they call a whip round, and have managed to raise 19s. for him.

Our District Nurse goes in each morning and does what she can for her,
and one morning she asked how she had got ruptured; and she said she
was not sure, but she thought it was when she was at the factory. And
it transpired that her eldest boy is very bright, and he managed to
win a scholarship, but his mother said she could not manage to get the
clothes for him that he ought to have at such a school, and so she got
work at the factory to try and clothe him better. She was only there
two months when she was taken ill and had to leave. (What mothers put
up with for their children!) She has been paying 3d. a week into a Sick
Loan, and Dividing Society, in connection with a Church, but she can
have no help from it, as her illness is through pregnancy.


4. “ALL DAY WASHING AND IRONING.”

In answer to your letter, in my opinion the cause of women suffering
from misplacements and various other inward complaints, is having to
work during pregnancy, and I am the mother of three children. When the
youngest was coming my husband was out of employment, so I had to go
out to work myself, standing all day washing and ironing. This caused
me much suffering from varicose veins, also caused the child to wedge
in some way, which nearly cost both our lives. The doctor said it was
the standing and the weight of the child. I have not been able to carry
a child the full time since then, and my periods stopped altogether at
thirty-four. Then I have a niece of twenty-five, who is at present in
hospital undergoing a serious operation through getting up too soon
after her confinement. Once we can make men and women understand that
a woman requires rest when bearing children, we shall not have so many
of our sisters suffering and dying through operations, or, on the other
hand, dragging out a miserable existence.

My husband’s wages was 19s. 10d. He was compelled to lose time in wet
or frosty weather, and I was very lucky to get my share, 18s., four
weeks in succession.

  _Wages 19s. 10d.; three children, one miscarriage._


5. A HALF-STARVED PREGNANCY.

My experience during and after my second pregnancy is only one example
of what thousands of married working women have to endure. My husband
has always been a very delicate man, and was ill most of the time I
carried both my children. He had been out of employment eight months
out of the nine I carried my first child.... As a last resource was
glad to go to work on the railway for the magnificent wage of 17s. a
week, and had to walk nearly six miles night and morning or pay 5d. a
day for train fare. Our rent was 7s. 6d. a week and clubs to be paid.
By the time my second child was born my husband’s wages had increased
to £1 1s. a week for seventy-two hours. By that time hard work and
worry and insufficient food had told on my once robust constitution,
with the result that I nearly lost my life through want of nourishment,
and did after nine months of suffering lose my child. No one but
mothers who have gone through the ordeal of pregnancy half starved,
to finally bring a child into the world to live a living death for
nine months, can understand what it means.... It was the Women’s
Co-operative Guild which saved me from despair.

The first confinement I managed to get through very well, having some
money left from what I had saved before marriage. But how I managed
to get through my second confinement I cannot tell anyone. I had to
work at laundry work from morning to night, nurse a sick husband,
and take care of my child three and a half years old. In addition
I had to provide for my coming confinement, which meant that I had
to do without common necessaries to provide doctor’s fees, which so
undermined my health that when my baby was born I nearly lost my life,
the doctor said through want of nourishment. I had suffered intensely
with neuralgia, and when I inquired among my neighbours if there was
anything I could take to relieve the pain, I was told that whatever I
took would do no good; it was quite usual for people to suffer from
neuralgia, and I should not get rid of it till my baby was born.

I had to depend on my neighbours for what help they could give during
labour and the lying-in period. They did their best, but from the
second day I had to have my other child with me, undress him and see
to all his wants, and was often left six hours without a bite of food,
the fire out and no light, the time January, and snow had lain on the
ground two weeks.

When I got up after ten days my life was a perfect burden to me. I lost
my milk and ultimately lost my baby. My interest in life seemed lost. I
was nervous and hysterical; when I walked along the streets I felt that
the houses were falling on me, so I took to staying at home, which of
course added to the trouble.

Now, is it possible under such circumstances for women to take care of
themselves, during pregnancy, confinement, and after? Can we any longer
wonder why so many married working women are in the lunatic asylums
to-day? Can we wonder that so many women take drugs, hoping to get rid
of the expected child, when they know so little regarding their own
bodies, and have to work so hard to keep or help to keep the children
they have already got? If only the State would do something that would
give _all_ working mothers the assurance that during pregnancy, where
needed, means would be provided whereby they could get an all-important
rest before confinement, and that proper attention should be provided
during and after so long as necessary. It would make all the difference
between a safe and speedy confinement, a better offspring, therefore
a better asset of the State, and a broken-down motherhood, and a race
of future parents who start in life very often with a constitution
enfeebled through the mother having to undergo privation, as well as
the mental and physical strain that childbirth entails.

  _Wages 17s. to £1 1s.; two children._


6. HEALTHY AND STRONG.

During pregnancy I always looked to my diet, and as my husband never
got more than 24s. 6d. per week, I had not much to throw away on
luxuries. I had plain food, such as oatmeal and bacon, and meat, plenty
of bread and good butter. I may say that during pregnancy and during
suckling my appetite was always better, and I ate more and enjoyed my
food better than at any other time. I always did my own housework and
my own washing, and I never had a doctor all the time I was having
children. I have had six, one dead.

During my labour I was never bad more than about three or four hours.
I felt I could get out of bed the first day, and I never had the
doctor, only an old midwife.

And though I say it myself, nobody had bonnier or healthier children
than I had, with fair skins and red cheeks.

I must say that I am a staunch teetotaller, and have been all my life.
I think that drink has a lot to do with some women’s sufferings.

I had one child born without a midwife at all, before we had time to
fetch her, and I did as well as at any other time.

We lived under the colliery, and our rent was only 3s. 6d. a week.
We got our coal at a lower price, about 1s. a week. During part of
the time we had a lodger, who paid us 11s., which helped up a bit.
But you must know we had to be very careful. But, taking all into
consideration, we were very comfortably off. We had not many doctors’
bills, as our children were all very healthy, and I don’t think I have
spent a pound on doctoring for myself since I was a baby, for which I
am very thankful.

  _Wages 18s. to 24s. 6d.; six children._


7. “SHE IS REAL ILL.”

I have a sister-in-law who has five children, and from the first month
of pregnancy she is real ill, the sickness (as she herself puts it)
strains her all to pieces, after which she is in a state of collapse.
It is painful to be with her, the faintness and sickness continue,
right up till the eighth month. It is not safe for her to go any
distance by herself, as it comes on at any time, and her legs are
blue-black until after her baby is born. All her children are living;
her confinements are normal. She is a very plucky woman. Of course,
she has to do everything herself; she could not afford to have anyone
in to help her, and in that state she has to do all her own washing,
cleaning, etc. She has been to the doctor during these bad times, but
he does not seem able to relieve her, only tells her to rest her legs
all she can, which of course is one of the things with a family around
you the mother cannot do. Her husband was only getting 15s. at the time
she was having her first three children. Now he is getting £1 per week.
He works for the Rural District Council.

  _Wages 15s.; five children._


8. MEN NEED EDUCATION.

My own experience in child-bearing was rather abnormal because I had
them late in life. Consequently, I suffered more than usual because
the bones were set and do not easily adapt themselves to changed
conditions. Extreme sickness from first to last, and during last months
much pain and much discomfort. My two first were lost from malnutrition
because I could not retain my food. In loss of strength the miscarriage
cost me most, and because of the falling of the womb--a trouble which
was not cured till I had a living child. I was not ignorant, and took
every care, so that I can conceive any mother’s life being a dreadful
thing if she was neglected under such circumstances.

My husband’s wages was very unsettled, never exceeded 30s., and was
often below the sum. I earned a little all the time by sewing. Did all
housework, washing, baking, and made all our clothes. But no amount
of State help can help the suffering of mothers until men are taught
many things in regard to the right use of the organs of reproduction,
and until he realises that the wife’s body belongs to herself, and
until the marriage relations takes a higher sense of morality and
bare justice. And what I imply not only exists in the lower strata of
society, but is just as prevalent in the higher. So it’s men who need
to be educated most. The sacred office of parenthood has not yet dawned
on the majority. Very much injury and suffering comes to the mother and
child through the father’s ignorance and interference. Pain of body
and mind, which leaves its mark in many ways on the child. No animal
will submit to this: why should the woman? Why, simply because of the
Marriage Laws of the woman belonging to the man, to have and to own,
etc.

  _Wages 30s.; three children, two miscarriages._


9. BAD CONFINEMENTS.

I shall only be too glad to assist you in giving my experience. In the
first place, I have had eight children; seven is now living. I was
twenty-three when I was married. My first pregnancy I suffered with my
leg swollen and veins ready to burst. At my confinement the baby was
hung with navel cord twice round the neck and once round the shoulder,
owing to lifting and reaching, which caused me hours of suffering, and
it caused my womb to come down, and I have had to wear something to
hold it up until these late years. I am now fifty-eight; my husband has
been dead seven years. I was left to fight life’s battles alone. As my
family increased I had to have my legs bandaged. I never felt a woman
during pregnancy; as I got nearer I felt worse. At my confinements the
greatest trouble was the flooding after the baby was born, and the
afterbirth grown to my side. When that was taken away the body had to
be syringed to stop mortification. I have had the doctor’s arm in my
body, and felt his fingers tearing the afterbirth from my side. While
I am writing, I almost fancy I am talking to you. I hope I have not
tired you with my letter.

  _Wages £1 to £2; eight children, two miscarriages._


10. “I AM A RUINED WOMAN.”

I have been a martyr to suffering through having children, owing to
the fact that I could not retain my food. I was always sick, troubled
with nausea and vomiting, which kept me very weak; my constitution was
brought that low, that after having three children born living I was
unable to go the full length of pregnancy. The last still-born child
I had, during pregnancy I was dropsical all the time I was carrying,
and I had to have two doctors to chloroform me before the child could
be born. It had taken all the water from me; it was impossible for it
to be born until they had lanced the child to let the water out of
it. I had to be fed every hour day and night. Besides two still-born
children, I have had two miscarriages. The last miscarriage I had I
lost that much blood it completely drained me. I was three whole months
and was unable to sleep; I could not even sleep one half-hour. I had
lost my sleep completely; my hair come off and left bald patches about
my head. The doctor told me if I had not had the presence of mind to
lay me flat on my bed when the miscarriage took place I should have
bled to death. Having all this to go through, it brought on falling of
the womb, and now that I am able to do for my family and attend to my
household duties, I have to wear a body-belt, a kind that is worn after
appendicitis. I am a ruined woman through having children. All the
times that I was pregnant I could not bear my husband to smoke one pipe
of tobacco. I have sent you the main ailments I have had to endure, but
there are a hundred and one little items that have crept in between
through being brought so weak. I have been subject to other ailments
besides, such as influenza, and rheumatic fever, and catarrh of the
bowels.

When I was married, my husband was a weaver; at that time his highest
wages were £1 per week. We paid 2s. 6d. rent, so that did not leave
much for food, fire, and clothing. My first-born was one year all but
two days when the second was born. When the last-named was three months
old, my husband went on strike for more wages; he was out eleven weeks,
and not a penny coming in. At the end of that period, there being both
men and women at the same job, the masters were so obstinate they
had to go in at the women’s price. After the strike there was a turn
of bad trade, and he was on short time for seven years; his average
wages during that period was 14s. per week. If I had not been a good
needlewoman and a capable manager it would have been worse.

  _Wages £1 to 14s.; three children, two still-births, two miscarriages._


11. “I WAS AWFULLY POOR.”

My first girl was born before I attained my twentieth year, and I had
a stepmother who had had no children of her own, so I was not able to
get any knowledge from her; and even if she had known anything I don’t
suppose she would have dreamt of telling me about these things which
were supposed to exist, but must not be talked about. About a month
before the baby was born I remember asking my aunt where the baby would
come from. She was astounded, and did not make me much wiser. I don’t
know whether my ignorance had anything to do with the struggle I had to
bring the baby into the world, but the doctor said that my youth had,
for I was not properly developed. Instruments had to be used, and I
heard the doctor say he could not tell whether my life could be saved
or not, for he said there is not room here for a bird to pass. All the
time I thought that this was the way all babies were born.

At the commencement of all my pregnancies I suffered terribly from
toothache, and for this reason I think all married child-bearing women
should have their teeth attended to, for days and nights of suffering
of this kind must have a bad effect on both the mother and child. I
also at times suffered torments from cramp in the legs and vomiting,
particularly during the first three months. I hardly think the cramp
can be avoided, but if prospective mothers would consult their doctors
about the inability to retain food, I fancy that might be remedied.
At the commencement of my second pregnancy I was very ill indeed.
I could retain no food, not even water, and I was constipated for
thirteen days, and I suffered from jaundice. This had its effect on
the baby, for he was quite yellow at birth, and the midwife having
lodgers to attend to, left him unwashed for an hour after birth. She
never troubled to get his lungs inflated, and he was two days without
crying. I had no doctor. I was awfully poor, so that I had to wash the
baby’s clothes in my bedroom at the fortnight’s end; but had I had any
knowledge like I possess now, I should have insisted at the very least
on the woman seeing my child’s lungs were properly filled. When we are
poor, though, we cannot say what _must_ be done; we have to suffer and
keep quiet. The boy was always weakly, and could not walk when my third
baby was born. He had fits from twelve to fourteen, but except for a
rather “loose” frame, seems otherwise quite healthy now.

My third child, a girl, was born in a two-roomed “nearly underground”
dwelling. We had two beds in the living-room, and the little scullery
was very damp. Had it not been for my neighbours, I should have had
no attendance after the confinement, and no fire often, for it was
during one of the coal strikes. My fourth child, a boy, was born under
better housing conditions, but not much better as regards money; and
during the carrying of all my children, except the first, I have had
insufficient food and too much work. This is just an outline. Did I
give it all, it would fill a book, as the saying goes.

In spite of all, I don’t really believe that the children (with the
exception of the oldest boy) have suffered much, only they might have
been so much stronger, bigger, and better if I had been able to have
better food and more rest.

Cleanliness has made rapid strides since my confinements; for never
once can I remember having anything but face, neck, and hands washed
until I could do things myself, and it was thought certain death to
change the underclothes under a week.

For a whole week we were obliged to lie on clothes stiff and stained,
and the stench under the clothes was abominable, and added to this we
were commanded to keep the babies under the clothes.

I often wonder how the poor little mites managed to live, and perhaps
they never would have done but for our adoration, because this constant
admiration of our treasures did give them whiffs of fresh air very
often.

My husband’s lowest wage was 10s., the highest about £1 only, which was
reached by overtime. His mother and my own parents generally provided
me with clothing, most of which was cast-offs.

  _Wages 10s. to £1; four children._


12. “I DRAGGED ABOUT IN MISERY.”

It is lack of knowledge that often brings unnecessary suffering. I know
it from experience. In my early motherhood I took for granted that
women had to suffer at these times, and it was best to be brave and
not make a fuss. Once when things were not brisk in the labour world,
I would do my house-cleaning all myself, for naturally at these times
you like to feel everything is in order everywhere when the strange
woman comes in to take charge. I was in a very weak state through worry
and the difficulty of meeting the demands. I had not seen a doctor,
for I was thinking of having a midwife I had heard of. I dragged about
in misery and in great pain. A friend called in one morning after I
had got the children off to school, and I suppose I looked very ill.
She said: “Have you engaged a doctor?” I said: “No, there is plenty of
time; I was only six months, and surely I shall have a change soon.” I
could not lay, sit, or stand in ease, and my legs were so bad. However,
she went away, saying nothing to me, and brought her doctor. He was
amazed at my condition, ordered me to bed, said my confinement was
near, and the child was in a critical condition. He sent for a midwife,
and they were with me from eleven o’clock till three o’clock. He said
the child was dead, and in such an awkward position that it nearly
cost my life to bring it. I had a very long illness follow on (it
would have been a lovely child full time). The child had been killed
through shock, and already showed signs of mortification. I was in a
poor state of health, and struggled against my strength, looking after
the children’s welfare and neglecting myself. In trying to lift the
washing-tub it slipped, and that was the shock; and instead of resting
and having advice (which I felt I could not afford), I persevered, and
that was the result. Now, if there had been such a thing as a Maternity
Centre where I could have sent for someone, or could have attended
without that feeling of expense, I could have been relieved of all that
suffering.

Another experience I had some nine years after the previous. I was
pregnant, work had been very scarce, and I was in a very weak state. My
husband had been at work three weeks when he happened an accident. He
had fallen from a high scaffold. The Clerk of the Works came to tell
me they had taken him to the hospital, and I had better go at once and
take someone with me. Of course, I thought the worst had happened. (He
did not know my condition.) I was between three and four months, and
this shock caused a miscarriage. I had a midwife, who, no doubt, was
all right when things were straightforward. I got about again, but was
very weak and ill. He was in hospital six weeks. I took in needlework.
I got very weak yet very stout. I thought it was through sitting so
much at the machine. I worked and starved myself to make sick pay, 12s.
per week, go as far as possible. I got so weak, and fainted several
times after heavy days at the machine. I was taken very ill one night,
and my daughter went for the doctor. He said: “We must have her in
bed,” and sent for a neighbour. It was a confinement of a seven-months
babe. When he told me it was childbirth, I said it was impossible, for
I had miscarried about four months previous. However, it was true. I
had been carrying twins--a most peculiar case--during that four months.
My system was being drained, and the worry and anxiety had effect on
the child. It was weak and did not move much. I had a bad time, but
the child lived for nine months, but a very delicate child. Now, if I
had been able to have a qualified midwife when I had the miscarriage,
we should have known there was another child, and if I could have been
medically treated, all that suffering could have been prevented, and I
might have had a strong child.

But apart from all that, I do not know which is the
worst--child-bearing with anxiety and strain of mind and body to
make ends meet, with the thought of another one to share the already
small allowance, or getting through the confinement fairly well, and
getting about household duties too soon, and bringing on other ailments
which make life and everything a burden. I could forgive a woman in
such a state giving herself and the children a drug which would end
everything. I was an invalid for six years through getting about too
soon and causing womb displacement.

  _Wages £2 2s.; eight children, one still-born, four miscarriages._


13. “VERY FORTUNATE.”

I think I have been very fortunate. I have had two children, both
girls; one will be sixteen in April, the other will be ten in August,
so you see there is six years and four months (and not even a
miscarriage) between them. I have always had the best of health, never
had a doctor until my second baby was born.... When I was married I was
three months short of twenty-one.... Trade was very bad at the time.
I worked in the mill up to six weeks from the event; we had a home to
make--that is why, as I thought every bit would help. Sometimes we did
not make 10s. between us. I had a midwife, and I went on very well; in
fact, I asked what I had to stay in bed for. The second day I got up,
the fifth day I went out, the seventh baby got on all right, and I went
back to work at eight weeks’ end. I gave her the breast till she was
twelve months old. When weaning her, I put plasters on my breasts,
which irritated the skin so much that they brought on inflammation. I
suffered awful, as I did not like to tell anybody. It went almost round
my body. Then I told mother. When she saw the state I was in she went
nearly frantic; she made me go to the doctor, and one box of salve
put me right. That is about the worst I suffered with her. I did not
even have morning sickness, which I have often heard women speak about
during pregnancy, with either of my children. When I was pregnant the
second time, I heard that the midwife I had the first time had started
drinking, so I was afraid to have her. I had a doctor, and it was well
I had, as I did not go on as well as I did the first time. I was in
bed a fortnight. I was well looked after, for I have one of the best
of husbands and a good mother. I might say I have wanted for nothing.
I have two fine girls.

  _Wages 7s. to 26s.; two children._


14. INFLAMMATION.

When my boy was coming, for three months I could not dress myself
properly; I could not get a pair of gloves or boots on, as I was so
swollen--I suppose with water. I did not get any advice, as I thought
I must just put up with it. After he was born, I could not pass my
water for a week--it had to be taken from me. Then I had inflammation
of the bladder, and finally inflammation of the kidneys, besides other
complications. My doctor, who was an old man, had to leave me in charge
of his son for a few days, and once, while talking about my illness, he
said it was a blessing I had had the inflammation of the kidneys, as
it had disclosed the fact that there was albumen in the water of some
standing. I told him how I had been held during pregnancy, and he said
I ought to have been to his father at that time, and he would have been
able to do me some good, but, like the majority of women, I thought it
was one of the ills I _had_ to bear.

The next case is of a young married woman with her first baby. She took
ill at the eight months, and had a very bad time, falling out of one
fit into another, and at last, after her baby was born, she lay two
days quite unconscious--in fact, they never expected she would recover.
She had two doctors, and they gave her every attention, and then when
she was getting better her own particular doctor told her that if she
had only consulted him beforehand he could have saved her a lot of
pain, which she had to put up with. He said it was some kidney trouble
which had been the reason of all she had suffered. In both her case and
mine we could have had advice, as far as the expense was concerned, but
it was sheer _ignorance, and the idea that we must put up with it till
the nine months were over_.

  _Wages £2; two children._


15. “OH, THE HORRORS WE SUFFER!”

From the time I married till just previous to the birth of my third
child, my husband earned 28s. per week; then followed two years’
shortness of work. When my fourth was born, we had no food or anything
to eat, until my husband went to a storekeeper and told him how we were
placed, and he trusted us, and said we ought to have asked him before.
And we all had dinner off oatmeal gruel made with tinned milk. The past
struggle left its mark on the physique of my children. One has since
died of heart disease, aged ten years; another of phthisis, sixteen
years; my youngest has swollen glands, and not at all robust, though
not born in poverty, aged fifteen years....

I have not been the worst-placed woman by a long way, my husband
generally having 30s. per week, but I could not afford help during
pregnancy, and I suffer from valvular disease of the heart, which
(doctors say) was caused of extreme attacks of hæmorrhage and shortness
of breath, leaving me a complete wreck at those times. My home was very
dirty, the children got ragged, meals worse than usual, and each doctor
I consulted said I was not fit to do my work, and I had not to bother.
I was told not to worry at all, or I should be worse than I was. No one
who has not been placed in a similar position can realise how horrible
it is to be so placed. I have resorted to drugs, trying to prevent or
bring about a slip. I believe I and others have caused bad health to
ourselves and our children. But what has one to do?

I hope this communication will not offend in any way. But after the
birth of my first baby I suffered from falling womb, and the torture of
that was especially cruel when at closet, in more than I can describe;
and quite by accident I learnt that other mothers I met were not
suffering the same. My baby was ten months old when I told the doctor,
who said I ought to have told him before, and he soon put me right. But
doctors who attended me never told me anything concerning my babies or
myself. My husband was easeful about attention to himself, and always
willing to help, even after working from 6 a.m. in the morning. I often
pitied him; he was never impatient. I have seen women similarly placed,
and their husbands throw their dinner in the fire. I have been told
I ought to do as well as his mother, and I wish I could have done.
Oh, the horrors we suffer when men and women are ignorant! Some have
severe attacks of hæmorrhage caused by sexual intercourse soon after
birth....

  _Wages 30s.; eight children, two still-born, three miscarriages._


16. “A NIGHTMARE YET.”

The first feeling of a young mother (to be) (unless she has been very
intelligently trained or is very ignorant) is one of fear for herself
when she finds out her condition. As time goes on she will probably
lose this fear in the feeling she is to have something all her very
own, but in some instances the dread grows, and in a sense fills her
whole being. This must of necessity weaken her bodily and mentally,
and, of course, makes her time of trial harder to bear.

I remember over my first baby, although I felt delighted to think
I was to be a mother, I had a very nervous fear that my baby would
prove weakly because I had suffered for so many years from chronic
bronchitis. I believe this dread had a very bad effect on my nervous
system, with the result that when I got within a fortnight of full
term my baby was born very weakly, and I had a severe labour lasting
two nights and two days. (This was twenty-three years ago.) No effort
was made to obtain help for me, although my mother at that time was
starting to practise as a midwife, and had all a mother’s fears for her
daughter in her first labour. At that time it was much more usual to
trust to Providence, and if a woman died it only proved her weakness
and unfitness for motherhood. My baby only lived seven months. In spite
of all this trouble, I was very glad when a year later I found I was
to become a mother again. I was still weak, and this baby was born
at eight months, very tiny but not weakly. I again had a slow time,
lasting two days and one night, but not so severe as the first. I had
what is known as “white-leg” during the lying-in period. This is
usually due to a septic condition, and may be induced by uncleanliness
or careless handling during the first stage of labour; again, a chill
will produce this state, and this was the cause in my case, owing to
getting out of bed on the second day rather than call mother upstairs
when I needed her. My last baby was born at a time when we were really
badly off. My husband was out of work during the greater part of the
time, and I was not only obliged to work myself, but often went short
of food and warm clothing when I was most in need of it. The effect
on my health was, of course, bad, but the baby was a fine healthy boy
weighing over 12 pounds. Bad as was the effect on my bodily health,
the mental effect was worse. I nearly lost hope and faith in everyone.
I felt that even the baby could not make up for the terrible strain I
had undergone, and at that time I could fully enter into the feelings
of those women who take drugs to prevent birth. I know I ought to have
been more strong-minded, but anyway, I got through all right after all,
and, strange to say, I got up feeling better and more hopeful than I
had felt for years. During this pregnancy I never dared to allow myself
to think of the time when the baby would be born; first, because I knew
the pain would be so bad, and then because I realised that I would not
be able to work when I got near the end and for some time afterwards. I
left off a month before and did not start again for four months after
the birth. I don’t know now _how_ I got through, and it is a nightmare
to me yet. (I may say here that although we were so poor we stuck to
the Store all through, and this was a great help.) I believe if I had
felt quite comfortable as to the position of my other children during
the time when I would be laid up, my sufferings would not have been so
great, or my dread of the labour.

  _Wages 25s.; three children._


17. LACK OF FOOD AND BAD HOUSING.

I think a great deal of suffering is caused to the mother and child
during pregnancy by lack of nourishment and rest, combined with bad
housing arrangements. The majority of working women before marriage
have been used to standing a great deal at their work, bringing about
much suffering which does not tell seriously until after marriage,
particularly during pregnancy. A very common complaint is falling of
the womb. If women could be taught to sit down more when they were
doing little jobs, that they very often stand to do now, I believe it
would be a great help to them physically. The majority of working women
do not get sufficient nourishment during pregnancy. If there is other
children the mother generally takes what is left. I believe this tells
very greatly at the time of confinement. I well remember the prostrate
condition I have been in on several occasions owing to lack of
nourishment and attention at the time. I found I could not get anybody
to come into my house and do the work unless I could pay them 10s. per
week; in consequence I had to take pot-luck. My last confinement I was
nearly twelve months before I was able to do my duties in the home,
which meant a great deal of suffering to my children, as they were
not kept clean. This caused me a great deal of trouble and anxiety.
I believe all this tells on the mother’s health and also the baby’s
which she is nursing. I have known women, who have had the opportunity
and good sense, to get all the nourishment and rest during pregnancy,
even at the expense of something going short in the home; at time of
confinement they have got over it quite easily, and made very little
difference to them a few hours afterwards.

I believe the bad housing arrangements have a very depressing effect on
mothers during pregnancy. I know of streets of houses where there are
large factories built, taking the whole of the daylight away from the
kitchen, where the woman spends the best part of her life. On top of
this you get the continual grinding of machinery all day. Knowing that
it is mostly women and girls who are working in these factories gives
you the feeling that their bodies are going round with the machinery.
The mother wonders what she has to live for; if there is another baby
coming she hopes it will be dead when it is born. The result is she
begins to take drugs. I need hardly tell you the pain and suffering she
goes through if the baby survives, or the shock it is to the mother
when she is told there is something wrong with the baby. She feels she
is to blame if she has done this without her husband knowing, and she
is living in dread of him. All this tells on the woman physically and
mentally; can you wonder at women turning to drink? If the child lives
to grow up, you find it hysterical and with very irritable, nasty ways
when in the company of other children. When you see all this it is like
a sting at your heart when you know the cause of it all and no remedy.

  _Wages 28s.; six children._


18. ASTONISHING HEALTH.

Although I have had eight children and one miscarriage, I am afraid my
experiences would not help you in the least, as I am supposed to be
one of those women who can stand anything. During my pregnancy I have
always been able to do my own work.

With the boys labour has only lasted twenty minutes, girls a little
longer. I have never needed a doctor’s help, and it has always been
over before he came. I have never had an after-pain in my life, so the
doctors don’t know what I am made of. I always had to get up and do my
own work at three weeks’ end. I work all day long at housework until
six or seven, and I then take up all voluntary work I can for the sake
of the Labour Cause. I am sorry and yet glad that my lot has not been
so bad as others. My idea is that everything depends on how a woman
lives, and how healthy she was born. No corsets and plenty of fruit,
also a boy’s healthy sports when she is young. I had the advantage of
never having to work before I was married, and never have wanted for
money, so when the struggle came I had a strong constitution to battle
with it all.

  _Wages 30s. to 35s., and upwards; eight children, one miscarriage._


19. “KEPT ALL TO MYSELF.”

I was a very strong woman before my baby was born. I was a weaver. I
worked up to five weeks before the baby was born. I had a good appetite
all the nine months and did not ail anything. But when baby was born
he was a miserable little thing. Now that I am older I can see things
different, and I say that if I had not have worked so hard during
the nine months, my baby would have been better. When a baby is born
delicate they are a great care for a good many years.

I may say here that I did not want any more. I never knew what it was
to ail anything all my life before, but I could not say that after. I
lost 2 stone in weight in a very short time after. Of course, I can see
now I was a good bit to blame, because I thought I was only like other
women would be, and kept all to myself. I was so strong before he was
born, that I was ashamed to own up to it that I felt so weak. It was
more weakness than anything else that I suffered from. They used to
tell me that I would perhaps be better if I had another, but I said
I never would go through it again to feel as bad again. I may say in
conclusion, if ever my son takes a wife, I will do all in my power to
help her not to suffer as I did.

  _Wages 20s.; one child._


20. STEAD’S PENNY POETS.

I was married at twenty-eight in utter ignorance of the things that
most vitally affect a wife and mother. My mother, a dear, pious soul,
thought ignorance was innocence, and the only thing I remember her
saying on the subject of childbirth was, “God never sends a babe
without bread to feed it.” Dame Experience long ago knocked the bottom
out of that argument for me. My husband was a man earning 32s. a
week--a conscientious, good man, but utterly undomesticated. A year
after our marriage the first baby was born, naturally and with little
pain or trouble. I had every care, and motherhood stirred the depths
of my nature. The rapture of a babe in arms drawing nourishment from
me crowned me with glory and sanctity and honour. Alas! the doctor
who attended me suffered from eczema of a very bad type in his hands.
The disease attacked me, and in twenty-four hours I was covered from
head to foot ... finally leaving me partially and sometimes totally
crippled in my hands. Fifteen months later a second baby came--a dear
little girl, and again I was in a fairly good condition physically
and financially, but had incurred heavy doctor’s bills and attendance
bills, due to my incapacity for work owing to eczema. Both the children
were delicate, and dietary expenses ran high. Believing that true
thrift is wise expenditure, we spent our all trying to build up for
them sound, healthy bodies, and was ill-prepared financially and
physically to meet the birth of a third baby sixteen months later.
Motherhood ceased to be a crown of glory, and became a fearsome
thing to be shunned and feared. The only way to meet our increased
expenditure was by dropping an endowment policy, and losing all
our little, hard-earned savings. I confess without shame that when
well-meaning friends said: “You cannot afford another baby; take this
drug,” I took their strong concoctions to purge me of the little life
that might be mine. They failed, as such things generally do, and the
third baby came. Many a time I have sat in daddy’s big chair, a baby
two and a half years old at my back, one sixteen months and one one
month on my knees, and cried for very weariness and hopelessness. I
fed them all as long as I could, but I was too harassed, domestic
duties too heavy, and the income too limited to furnish me with a
rich nourishing milk.... Nine months later I was again pregnant, and
the second child fell ill. “She cannot live,” the doctors said, but I
loved.... She is still delicate, but bright and intelligent. I watched
by her couch three weeks, snatching her sleeping moments to fulfil the
household task. The strain was fearful, and one night I felt I must
sleep or die--I didn’t much care which; and I lay down by her side, and
slept, and slept, and slept, forgetful of temperatures, nourishment or
anything else.... A miscarriage followed in consequence of the strain,
and doctor’s bills grew like mushrooms. The physical pain from the
eczema, and working with raw and bleeding hands, threatened me with
madness. I dare not tell a soul. I dare not even face it for some time,
and then I knew I must fight this battle or go under. Care and rest
would have cured me, but I was too proud for charity, and no other help
was available. You may say mine is an isolated case. It is not. The
sympathy born of suffering brings many mothers to me, just that they
may find a listening ear. I find this mental state is common, and the
root cause is lack of rest and economic strain--economic strain being
the greatest factor for ill of the two.

Working-class women have grown more refined; they desire better homes,
better clothes for themselves and their children, and are far more
self-respecting and less humble than their predecessors. But the strain
to keep up to anything like a decent standard of housing, clothing,
diet, and general appearance, is enough to upset the mental balance of
a Chancellor of the Exchequer. How much more so a struggling pregnant
mother! Preventives are largely used. Race suicide, if you will, is the
policy of the mothers of the future. Who shall blame us?

Two years later a fourth baby came. Varicose veins developed. I thought
they were a necessary complement to childbirth. He was a giant of a boy
and heavy to carry, and I just dragged about the housework, washing and
cleaning until the time of his birth; but I looked forward to that nine
days in bed longingly; to be still and rest was a luxury of luxuries.
Economics became a greater strain than ever now that I had four
children to care for. Dimly conscious of the evils of sweating, instead
of buying cheap ready-made clothes, I fashioned all their little
garments and became a sweated worker myself. The utter monotony of
life, the lack of tone and culture, the drudgery and gradual lowering
of the standard of living consequent upon the rising cost of living,
and increased responsibilities, was converting me into a soulless
drudge and nagging scold. I felt the comradeship between myself and
husband was breaking up. He could not enter into my domestic, I would
not enter into his intellectual pursuits, and again I had to fight
or go under. I could give no time to mental culture or reading and I
bought Stead’s penny editions of literary masters, and used to put them
on a shelf in front of me washing-day, fastened back their pages with a
clothes-peg, and learned pages of Whittier, Lowell, and Longfellow, as
I mechanically rubbed the dirty clothes, and thus wrought my education.
This served a useful purpose; my children used to be sent off to sleep
by reciting what I had learnt during the day. My mental outlook was
widened, and once again I stood a comrade and helpmeet by my husband’s
side, and my children all have a love for good literature.

Three years later a fifth baby came. I was ill and tired, but my
husband fell ill a month prior to his birth, and I was up day and
night. Our doctor was, and is, one of the kindest men I have ever met.
I said: “Doctor, I cannot afford you for myself, but will you come if
I need?” “I hope you won’t need me, but I’ll come.” I dare not let my
husband in his precarious condition hear a cry of pain from me, and
travail pain cannot always be stifled; and here again the doctor helped
me by giving me a sleeping draught to administer him as soon as I felt
the pangs of childbirth. Hence he slept in one room while I travailed
in the other, and brought forth the loveliest boy that ever gladdened a
mother’s heart. So here I am a woman of forty-one years, blessed with a
lovely family of healthy children, faced with a big deficit, varicose
veins, and an occasional loss of the use of my hands. I want nice
things, but I must pay that debt I owe. I would like nice clothes (I’ve
had three new dresses in fourteen years), but I must not have them yet.
I’d like to develop mentally, but I must stifle that part of my nature
until I have made good the ills of the past, and I am doing it slowly
and surely, and my heart grows lighter, and will grow lighter still
when I know that the burden is lifted from the mothers of our race.

  _Wages 32s. to 40s.; five children, one miscarriage._


21. HOW A WOMAN MAY SUFFER.

I cannot tell you all my sufferings during the time of motherhood. I
thought, like hundreds of women do to-day, that it was only natural,
and you had to bear it. I was left an orphan, and having no mother to
tell me anything, I was quite unprepared for marriage and what was
expected of me.

My husband being some years my senior, I found he had not a bit of
control over his passions, and expected me to do what he had been in
the habit of paying women to do.

I had three children and one miscarriage within three years. This left
me very weak and suffering from very bad legs. I had to work very hard
all the time I was pregnant.

My next child only lived a few hours. After the confinement I was very
ill, and under the care of a doctor for some time. I had inflammation
in the varicose veins; the doctor told me I should always lay with my
legs above my head. He told my husband I must not do any work for some
time. I had either to wear a bandage or an elastic stocking to keep my
legs so that I might get about at all. I am still suffering from the
varicose veins now, although my youngest child is fourteen; at times
I am obliged to keep my legs bandaged up. With each child I had they
seemed to get worse, and me having them so quickly never allowed my
legs to get into their normal condition before I was pregnant again. I
do wish there could be some limit to the time when a woman is expected
to have a child. I often think women are really worse off than beasts.
During the time of pregnancy, the male beast keeps entirely from the
female: not so with the woman; she is at the prey of a man just the
same as though she was not pregnant. Practically within a few days of
the birth, and as soon as the birth is over, she is tortured again. If
the woman does not feel well she must not say so, as a man has such a
lot of ways of punishing a woman if she does not give in to him....

  _Wages 30s. average; seven children, two miscarriages._


22. “GOT ON SPLENDIDLY.”

I have only had one child and one miscarriage, but I can assure you I
had such good nursing that I got on splendidly. Of course, I was not
allowed to get up before the tenth day, and I do not think that anyone
ought to do so, even if they can. I think if everyone at those times
had great care and good nursing for a month, there is no reason why
they should not get on as well as I did.

  _One child, one miscarriage._


23. “ONE OF THE FORTUNATE.”

I must be one of the fortunate ones. I have always had fairly good
health during pregnancy, and good times at confinements and getting up.
I had never had anything to do with children before marriage, and I owe
my good health to being well nourished and looked after by my mother
when I was a growing girl. I think if the young girls of to-day are
properly cared for, it will make all the difference to the mothers of
the future, and save much suffering during pregnancy and after.

  _Wages 26s. to 30s.; three children, two miscarriages._


24. UTTERLY OVERDONE.

Sometimes we think that our own life does not seem to be of any
importance, and our troubles are what should be, specially before the
Maternity Benefit. When I was married, I had to leave my own town to go
out into the world, as it were, and when I had to have my first baby, I
knew absolutely nothing, not even how they were born. I had many a time
thought how cruel (not wilfully, perhaps) my mother was not to tell
me all about the subject when I left home. Although I was twenty-five
years of age when married, I had never been where a baby was born. When
my baby was born I had been in my labour for thirty-six hours, and did
not know what was the matter with me, and when it was born it was as
black as a coal and took the doctor a long while to get life into it.
It was only a seven-months baby, and I feel quite sure if I had been
told anything about pregnancy it would not have happened. I carried a
heavy piece of oilcloth, which brought on my labour. Anyway, the boy
lived, but it cannot be expected that he can be as robust as if he had
been a nine months baby, but he is healthy, but not extra strong.

When he was six years old, I had my fifth baby, and had also a
miscarriage, and then I went on strike. My life was not worth living
at this rate, as my husband was only a working man, out of work when
wet or bad weather, and also in times of depression. I had all my
own household work to do, washing, mending, making clothes, baking,
cooking, and everything else.

In those six years I never knew what it was to have a proper night’s
sleep, for if I had not a baby on the breast I was pregnant, and how
could you expect children to be healthy, as I always seemed to be
tired. If I sat down, I very often fell asleep through the day.

I knew very little about feeding children; when they cried, I gave them
the breast. If I had known then what I know now, perhaps my children
would have been living. I was ignorant, and had to suffer severely for
it, for it nearly cost me my life, and also those of my children. I
very often ponder over this part of my life. I must not say anything
about my mother now, because she is dead, but I cannot help thinking
what might have been if she had told me.

  _Five children, one miscarriage._

[Illustration: FACSIMILE OF EXTRACT FROM LETTER 24.]


25. THREE CHILDREN IN THREE YEARS.

I was married young. My first three children were born in three years.
My husband’s wages at that time was 27s. a week. My husband works in
a boot and shoe factory. In the winter-time they did not make many
full weeks. There were clubs to pay and holidays to provide for. The
consequence was my third child was not born strong. She had a cough
as soon as she was born. It was a struggle to put enough by to have
a nurse in for a fortnight. I have had to get about to do my own
housework long enough before I was fit to do it. My last two children
have been stronger because I have been able to get better support. My
husband was working for Co-operative firms.

When we know what the working women have to go through, you need not
wonder at them trying to curtail the family. Though the wages have gone
up, it is quite as difficult, for the prices of commodities have gone
up too. I do feel that something should be done to help our women,
so that they can take better care of themselves during the time of
pregnancy. But when they only have the same amount of money coming in,
how are they going to do it? For it takes them all their time to keep
going on. A mother never thinks of herself. She is always trying to
make her family comfortable. A good many of them get about too quick
after confinement, and it is making invalids of a good many. I am very
sorry I am not in active service for the Guild. I cannot tell you how
much I love the work.

  _Wages 16s. to 27s.; six children, one miscarriage._


26. “SUCH IS THE LIFE OF POOR WOMEN.”

One of the difficulties I experienced during pregnancy was saving the
doctor’s fee out of the small wage, which was only just enough each
week for ordinary expenses. Thanks to the Maternity Benefit, a woman
now knows she is provided for at the time.

I have had six children, all living, and what a terrible time it is,
to be sure, especially during the last two months--only just enough to
live on and another coming. The mental strain in addition to bodily
labour must surely affect the child. I think a woman in that state
should have all the rest that is possible. I did fairly well for a
working man’s wife, but the recollection is anything but pleasant.
Fancy bending over a washing-tub, doing the family washing perhaps an
hour or two before baby is born. I think a woman in that condition
should be considered unable to do heavy work for quite six weeks
previous to the birth of her child.

Like other wage-paid workers, my husband’s wages fluctuated. The
unsteadiness of the wages of a labourer is a matter of concern, and
working a full week he would scarcely receive a real living wage.
During the time of bringing my children up, the highest wage I received
in any one week was 30s., and the lowest--well, I had so many that I
really do not know how I got through. A week’s holiday[A] meant no
wage at the week-end. And if the machinery broke down, or there were
strikes or lock-outs, it stopped for six clear days, the sum of 10s.,
and 1s. for each child, would be paid. The same rate would be paid for
out of work. My husband was seldom out of work, but, as I have stated,
his wage was subject to fluctuation. I think the lowest (not to mention
holidays of a week duration, when perhaps I had saved the Dividend to
tide the week over) was 4s. 6d.

I shall have to tell you of a case near my home. The woman, I believe,
is in her last month. I met her on her way home carrying a baby of two
years (her second). She had been out to wash, as she said every copper
helped (her husband is a labourer). She said: “I have to go out as long
as I am able to help, to clean or wash; you see, they will not let me
work in the factory.” When questioned about the baby she was carrying,
her answer was that she took him with her, and he just sits on a chair
until she has done. The child in question is rickety. He cannot stand
yet. Such is the life of poor women. I have known many such.

[A] _I.e._, an enforced holiday.


27. WORKED UP TO THE LAST.

I will just give you a little of my confinements. I had been married
eighteen months when I had my first baby, when I had a trying time,
being only an eight-months baby. My water broke five weeks before,
and caused what the doctor calls “dry labour.” He only lived twelve
hours. The second came three years and nine months afterwards. I had
a straight labour, but I flooded afterwards, and if the doctor had
not been there I should have lost my life; it caused me three months’
doctoring afterwards. The third one, which came two years and one month
after, I had a fairly good labour. Over this one my sufferings were
mostly before it came. I had varicose veins in the right leg right
away in the abdomen, and the irritation was most distressing; I used
to walk the bedroom most nights during the last month. The fourth came
two years and three months after the third, and the doctor put me an
elastic band on my leg, and of course I did not suffer so much over
that one. I could have told at the meeting, where Mrs. D. was talking,
about babies’ eyes, for this one’s eyes after a few days began as if
they had got cold in them, and the doctor told me then many people took
it for cold, but if neglected it was most serious. I am pleased to say
I have had no trouble, for he is a fine young fellow now.

Between the fourth and fifth I was four years and eleven months, and
then the sixth I went five years and eleven months, and was forty-two
when I had him. Of course, I think I am suffering now for some of it,
as I have always had to do my own work up to the last, and have had a
lot of sickness with my husband and my second boy; till he was eleven
years old I scarce ever had the doctor out of the house. I must say
that I have had a good husband to help me through, but I do hope we get
the £7 10s., and then there will be a many who will not suffer as many
poor women have done in the past. At the time I had my children, and
weighing all things together, I don’t think my husband’s wages averaged
no more than 28s. a week, lowest 12s. and 15s. I should like to tell
you, besides children we had my husband’s mother to keep, and allowed
her 2s. 6d. a week besides keeping her. He has never been a strong man
either, and many a time had him at home six or seven weeks at a time. I
feel that when I go to conferences and meetings that I wish I had been
a co-operator years ago, for since I have been a Guild worker I feel
the years have been wasted, but I am trying to do my best now in my
little way. Wishing you every success in the campaign we are fighting.

  _Wages average 28s.; six children, one miscarriage._


28. HEAVY EXPENSE OF CHILDBIRTH.

My experiences as a young woman were very difficult, for I was the
first child, and had never been brought up with young babies, or
afterwards been where they were. My mother dying when I was three years
old, I had no one to turn to for advice. I had spent all my youth in
the country, and came as a stranger into a strange place, knowing no
one but the man I married. My first child was a very delicate child,
but I have often thought since that perhaps I had not done all things
that were wise, but that would be for want of knowledge. I think a
mother is a peculiarity during pregnancy, for I myself never seemed to
want anything I had cooked myself, and if I went to any other house I
could have eaten the poorest of foods. Then one must not go and buy
what we may fancy, as that is an extra expense to the home; and knowing
there is an additional expense coming, we have to be very careful. I
have not had the Maternity Benefit yet, but that is only a trifle to
the large expense that is incurred, when you have paid £1 1s. for your
doctor, your nurse 10s. per week, a washerwoman 2s. per day (you cannot
get a nurse here under, and if she does the washing she will charge
12s. per week). Then, you never find anyone that makes the money go as
far as you do yourself, so that when you get up, instead of having the
best of support, and very little to do, you have to begin to get pulled
round again, and start and do the household work before you are strong
enough, with an extra one added. Naturally the child either cannot be
nursed by the mother at all, or only partly. The child suffers as well
as the mother.

If it could be made possible, I really think mothers should have
practically nothing to do with heavy work three months before
childbirth and three months after--that is, if life is to be made
worth living. But at present we have to clean down thoroughly ready
for the event, till I have found myself wondering if death would not
be a release. What with worry and feeling bad, I am never surprised
at hearing of an expectant mother committing suicide. If she has two
or three tiny children, she never has a minute’s rest, if she is an
energetic housewife.

I think I won’t write any more, or you will be thinking I am rather a
depressing character, but I shall be glad if anything I have said is
any use to others as a benefit in future time.

  _Wages 20s. to 45s.; five children._


29. “I AM NEARLY USED UP.”

Through my married life I have had a good, kind partner, which means
so much to the wife, and who always provided me with a doctor and a
good nurse for my confinements, which goes without saying that the
mother and child have a much better chance than other neglected ones.
The first five were born with fifteen months between; then there was a
wait of eight years for the sixth, and three years for the seventh. I
have always worked hard both before and after childbirth. Give a woman
a quiet home and an easy conscience and good plain food, and I see no
reason why both mother and child should not do well. Personally, I
don’t know what I should have done if it had not been for my good old
nurse, my dear mother having passed away some years before; but by
the grace of God and plenty of common sense, I have brought all my
children through so far. I was married in 1884, and knew practically
nothing about a child’s entry into the world. I do think there should
be somewhere where intending brides could get information that would
in some way prepare them for what may take place--those who have no
mothers, I mean. But so much depends on the woman herself, whether she
is going to make the best of things. Personally, I found it was no
good worrying, although I found it much harder than most. I never knew
what it was to have a day at the seaside for twenty years. I am not
grumbling, only now I am nearly used up. If only the Maternity Benefit
had been given when I and many others needed it, I cannot help thinking
I could have done much better. My husband is a bricklayer, and you may
guess it was a bit of a struggle with my little family.

  _Seven children._

[Illustration: ELEVEN CHILDREN BORN, ALL LIVING. FATHER A FISH-HAWKER.

This family is not connected with the Women’s Co-operative Guild.

(_Reproduced by kind permission of the Medical Officer of Health for
Liverpool._)]


30. “MOTHER LAST.”

When we were first married my husband’s wages was £1 a week. I have had
seven children; one died at birth, one at one year old, and five are
living. Each was about two years and three months old when the other
was born. I had one miscarriage, which left me very ill for a long
time. I found that the money was so little to do on that I must work
as well to pay my way and clothe my children. My husband neither drank
or smoked, but when rent, coals, gas, and food is taken out, what was
left for other things? I had boarders, and was standing on my legs so
much that after the birth of my last child a marble leg set in. I went
under an operation, but my leg is still very bad. A mother wants good
food before the birth as well as after, but how can it be done out of
so little money? If father takes his food it must be as good as can
be got; then the children come next and mother last.

  _Wages 20s.; seven children._


31. LITTLE TO TELL.

Why is it these things have never been thought of before? Is it
ignorance, or is it that people are got used to the idea that we have
to expect all sorts of illnesses when a woman gets pregnant, and we
have just to put up with it and do the best we can? Personally, I
have very little to tell of my own experiences, although I have four
children--two boys and two girls, the eldest fifteen years and the
youngest six years. Compared with some working mothers, I have gone
through those trying periods fairly well. Also my confinements have on
the whole been good. My husband’s occupation is a carpenter and joiner,
and he gets the trade union rate of wages of the district.

  _Wages, trade union rate; four children._


32. RESTRICTION ADVOCATED.

I feel that I must write and explain why I advocate educating women to
the idea that they should not bring children into the world without
the means to provide for them. I know it is a most delicate subject,
and very great care must be used in introducing it, but still, a word
spoken sometimes does good. Someone has said that most of the trouble
with delicate children were caused by women trying to destroy life
in the early days of pregnancy. I do not, of course, recommend that
sort of thing. It is absolutely wrong. But it is terrible to see how
women suffer, even those that are in better conditions of life. I
will quote one or two personal experiences. My grandmother had over
twenty children; only eight lived to about fourteen years, only two
to a good old age. A cousin (a beautiful girl) had seven children in
about seven years; the first five died in birth, the sixth lived, and
the seventh died and the mother also. What a wasted life! Another had
seven children; dreadful confinements, two or three miscarriages, an
operation for trouble in connection with same. Three children died and
the mother also quite young. There are cases all round us much worse.
You find in the majority of cases that in large families a certain
number die and the others have less strength. Of course, there are
exceptions. The trouble is that it takes so very long in England for
things to be changed, and you are told to mind your own business and
let people do as they like; but I am pleased to see that many men and
women are getting wiser, to the benefit of the wives and families for
whom the poor husband has to provide.


33. “ALMOST A WRECK.”

I was married at the age of twenty-two (barely twenty-two years), and
by the time I had reached my thirty-second birthday was the mother
of seven children, and I am sure you will pardon me if I take the
credit for bringing up such a family without the loss of even one,
seeing that it entailed such a great amount of suffering to myself on
account of having to nurse them through all illness, and in addition
(after sitting up many nights in succession) being compelled to do all
household duties.

During pregnancy I suffered much. When at the end of ten years I was
almost a mental and physical wreck, I determined that this state of
things should not go on any longer, and if there was no natural means
of prevention, then, of course, artificial means must be employed,
which were successful, and am happy to say that from that time I have
been able to take pretty good care of myself, but often shudder to
think what might have been the result if things had been allowed to
go on as they were. Two days after childbirth I invariably sat up in
bed knitting stockings and doing general repairs for my family. My
husband at that time was earning 30s. per week, and out of that amount
claimed 6s. 6d. as pocket-money, and when I tell you that through all
my difficulties there were no debts contracted on my part, you will be
able to form some idea of what women are, in some cases, called upon to
endure.

  _Wages 26s. to 30s.; seven children._


34. DELICATE CHILDREN.

I had my three children in two years and five months, and all the
time I carried I had violent sickness, night and day, under a doctor
practically the whole time, who, of course, were unable to prevent
my suffering. The result was my babies were delicate; the last one
suffered with gastritis the whole of its short life--four years and
ten months--which ended in peritonitis and abdominal tuberculosis. I
have the eldest one still, but he is very delicate and unable to attend
school.

  _Wages 21s. to 27s.; three children._


35. CONTINUAL PREGNANCY FOR FIFTEEN YEARS.

I can speak from experience. For fifteen years I was in a very poor
state of health owing to continual pregnancy. As soon as I was over
one trouble, it was all started over again. In one instance, I was
unable to go further than the top of the street the whole time owing
to bladder trouble, constant flow of water. With one, my leg was so
terribly bad I had constantly to sit down in the road when out, and
stand with my leg on a chair to do my washing. I have had four children
and _ten_ miscarriages, three before the first child, each of them
between three and four months. No cause but weakness, and, I’m afraid,
ignorance and neglect. I was in a very critical state for years; my
sufferings were very great from acute weakness. I now see a great deal
of this agony ought never to have been, with proper attention. It is
good to see some of our women waking up to this fact. It is help and
attention during pregnancy that is wanted, and I hope my own dear
daughter, if she ever marries, will be one to benefit with others, by
our experience. I do hope this letter is something of what you are
wishing for, hoping for good results of our Guild work in this matter.

  _Wages 25s.; four children, ten miscarriages._


36. MANY MISCARRIAGES.

My experience during wifehood has been that so long as husband and
children could have necessities the mother could manage somehow.

It is my silver-wedding day to-morrow, and you will see something
of what it has meant to me. I was married young; my husband is five
years older. I had my first three children before I was twenty-four,
nursing them all. Then I had three miscarriages in the next eight
years. I had two more children later, in one and a half years. Since
then, eleven years ago, I have had a misplaced womb, and have had two
more miscarriages since, one being of twins five months, and one three
months.

I believe it was having children too fast that weakened my inside and
brought on miscarriages.

When I heard Mrs. H. say at our Conference she always had £5 provided
for confinement, I felt that she had indeed been a lucky woman. I have
never yet been in that position, and it is because a woman has not
enough money to pay for things being done for her until she is strong
enough to do them for herself, that causes so much suffering.

My husband’s wages was 30s. a week when he made a full week, but
unfortunately his trade was very uncertain. In ten years we had moved
four different times--twice to A, back again to B, and then to C which
accounts a great deal for us being short, as we had to pay our own
expenses each time, and of course you will understand what it means
to a mother when she is left behind. The husband must be found his
board-money and pocket-money, even if she goes short of necessaries.

  _Wages 30s.; five children, five miscarriages._

[Illustration: FACSIMILE OF EXTRACT FROM LETTER 36.]


37. AGAINST LARGE FAMILIES.

May I say, first of all, that lack of knowledge means, in nearly every
case, much unnecessary suffering. I was married at twenty-one, and
have had three children--two boys and one girl. Eldest thirty in May,
youngest twenty-five. No miscarriages. I might say that I was very
ignorant when I was married; my mother did not consider it at all
proper to talk about such things. There is too much mock modesty in
the world and too little time given to the things that matter. Knowing
how ignorant I was on matters of motherhood, my husband bought a book
for me called “Advice to a Wife,” by Dr. Henry Pye Chavasse. It is a
beautifully written book and would be a gift of untold value to any
girl about to marry. There is also a sequel entitled “Advice to a
Mother”--it has saved me pounds of expense--price 2s. 6d., by the same
author. Yet, on the other hand, with all this knowledge, I had a very
dreadful time with my first child--in fact, I nearly lost my life and
reason too, and have never really enjoyed good health since. I was
fully six months before I could look after my baby. This was one of
my greatest disappointments. I was obliged to put my little one out
to nurse, although I had an ample supply of milk. My second and third
confinements were very bad, but I was able to get about at the end of
the month. It is always a mystery how some poor mothers get about so
soon, but of course some women are much stronger than others. Here let
me add that through getting about too soon a great deal of suffering
is stored up for later years. My old doctor once said to me that if
women would only realise that a certain amount of rest was absolutely
necessary after confinement, it would add several years to their life.
I cannot speak too strongly about the evils of miscarriages. One
miscarriage brought about unlawfully ruins a woman’s constitution more
than half a dozen children. I have suffered from varicose veins since
my first child was born, and during pregnancy.

My husband’s wages during child-bearing period have been never more
than 24s.; being a piece-worker, _has_ been as low as 9s. The wages
I received when my last child was born (the same week, I mean) were
11s. I was glad to avail myself of a free doctor from the hospital.
I may say I had a black doctor, and was never better attended in my
life. I do not believe in large families. It does not give either the
mother or the children a chance. Here again, I think, much education
is needed. Fathers ought to control their bodies for the sake of the
mother and child. I could quote several instances where a mother’s
life has become intolerable through the husband’s lack of control. I do
trust that the new Maternity Scheme will soon be a fact. I feel that,
when put into working order, thousands of poor mothers will be saved
unnecessary suffering.

  _Wages 9s. to 24s.; three children._


38. “OTHER CHILDREN WITH MEASLES.”

I think the earlier stages of pregnancy are the worst, but a woman
needs most attention when she gets up. I have had to nurse my other
children with measles when my baby was only four days old. I could
never employ a proper nurse. I had six children when my husband was
getting £1 a week. I am so glad to see the improvements in the lot of
women to-day, but in some ways it is worse now to bring up a family. I
am so glad to see anything being done to help the mother.

  _Wages £1 and upwards; eight children._


39. BENEFIT FROM HEARTS OF OAK.

I am afraid I have not much to tell from my experience. I have always
been able to look after myself, with the help of a good husband. I have
had nine children; eight are living.

When I tell you my husband is a member of the Hearts of Oak Benefit
Society, you will know I have benefited by it.[B]

  _Nine children._

[B] The Hearts of Oak gives a benefit of 30s. at child-birth.


40. NEGLECT BY DOCTORS.

I might say that I have had two children. The first one was still-born,
but it was owing to the doctor not paying proper attention to me, as,
when he came, he said he would not be needed until the morning after.
However, I got to be worse, and he was fetched again, but refused to
come, so we had to get a midwife, and she said if I had had proper
attention the child would have been born then. Consequently, the child
was suffocated in the birth. When all was over, my husband went to tell
him, and he said he was very glad, as he wanted his rest. Then when I
was going to have my second, I ordered another doctor, and when he was
wanted, he was drinking, and sent another midwife; so you see I have
not had it all straightforward. But when I was carrying them, I can say
that I was very well during the time of pregnancy, only for sickness in
the morning and after food, until about seven months gone, when I was
all right.

  _Wages 21s. to 23s.; two children._


41. OVER-CHILD-BEARING.

My feelings during pregnancy were just like those of Mary in Hall Caine
(“The Woman Thou Gavest Me”). My mind was full of love and my time of
preparation for the coming life within me. I worked very hard during
the time of six children, knitting stockings and making clothes for
those I already had, so my little one could be well nursed. Three are
suffering from consumption, and one from curvature. When I had had
six I never murmured, never once said I had enough, and did not want
more, but after the birth of my last one I changed, because I could
not nurse it and never carried it about. I do not blame my husband for
this birth. He had waited patiently for ten months because I was ill,
and thinking the time was safe, I submitted as a duty, knowing there
is much unfaithfulness on the part of the husband where families are
limited.

What is necessary for mothers is State aid for every child she gives
birth to. If this is necessary for the aged, it is more so for the
mother with the children.

It is quite time this question of maternity was taken up, and we
must let the men know we are human beings with ideals, and aspire to
