floor, place a heel in each hand and raise both legs in the air. I have to sit on a
cushion, because otherwise my poor backside really takes a beating.
Everyone here is reading a book called A Cloudless Morning. Mother thought it was
extremely good because it describes a number of adolescent problems. I thought to
myself, a bit ironically, "Why don't you take more interest in your own adolescents
first!"
I think Mother believes that Margot and I have a better relationship with our parents
than anyone in the whole wide world, and that no mother is more involved in the lives
of her children than she is. She must have my sister in mind, since I don't believe
Margot has the same problems and thoughts as I do. Far be it from me to point out
to Mother that one of her daughters is not at all what she imagines. She'd be
completely bewildered, and anyway, she'd never be able to change; I'd like to spare
her that grief, especially since I know that everything would remain the same. Mother
does sense that Margot loves her much more than I do, but she thinks I'm just going
through a phase.
Margot's gotten much nicer. She seems a lot different than she used to be. She's not
nearly as catty these days and is becoming a real friend. She no longer thinks of me
as a litde kid who doesn't count.
It's funny, but I can sometimes see myself as others see me. I take a leisurely look
at the person called "Anne Frank" and browse through the pages of her life as though
she were a stranger.
Before I came here, when I didn't think about things as much as I do now, I
occasionally had the feeling that I didn't belong to Momsy, Pim and Margot and that I
would always be an outsider. I sometimes went around for six months at a time
pretending I was an orphan. Then I'd chastise myself for playing the victim, when
really, I'd always been so fortunate. After that I'd force myself to be friendly for a
while. Every morning when I heard footsteps on the stairs, I hoped it would be
Mother coming to say good morning. I'd greet her warmly, because I honesly did look
forward to her affectionate glance. But then she'd snap at me for having made some
comment or other (and I'd go off to school feeling completely discouraged.
On the way home I'd make excuses for her, telling myself that she had so many
worries. I'd arrive home in high spirits, chatting nineteen to the dozen, until the events
of the morning would repeat themselves and I'd leave the room with my schoolbag in
my hand and a pensive look on my face. Sometimes I'd decide to stay angry, but then
I always had so much to talk about after school that I'd forget my resolution and want
Mother to stop whatever she was doing and lend a willing ear. Then the time would
come once more when I no longer listened for the steps on the stairs and felt lonely
and cried into my pillow every night.
Everything has gotten much worse here. But you already knew that. Now God has sent
someone to help me: Peter. I fondle my pendant, press it to my lips and think, "What
do I care! Petel is mine and nobody knows it!" With this in mind, I can rise above
every nasty remark. Which of the people here would suspect that so much is going on
in the mind of a teenage girl?
SATURDAY, JANUARY 15, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
There's no reason for me to go on describing all our quarrels and arguments down to
the last detail. It's enough to tell you that we've divided many things like meat and
fats and oils and are frying our own potatoes. Recently we've been eating a little
extra rye bread because by four o'clock we're so hungry for dinner we can barely
control our rumbling stomachs.
Mother's birthday is rapidly approaching. She received some extra sugar from Mr.
Kugler, which sparked off jealousy on the part of the van Daans, because Mrs. van D.
didn't receive any on her birthday. But what's the point of boring you with harsh
words, spiteful conversations and tears when you know they bore us even more?
Mother has expressed a wish, which isn't likely to come true any time soon: not to
have to see Mr. van Daan's face for two whole weeks. I wonder if everyone who
shares a house sooner or later ends up at odds with their fellow residents. Or have
we just had a stroke of bad luck? At mealtime, when Dussel helps himself to a
quarter of the half-filled gravy boat and leaves the rest of us to do without, I lose
my appetite and feel like jumping to my feet, knocking him off his chair and throwing
him out the door.
Are most people so stingy and selfish? I've gained some insight into human nature
since I came here, which is good, but I've had enough for the present. Peter says the
same.
The war is going to go on despite our quarrels and our longing for freedom and fresh
air, so we should try to make the best of our stay here.
I'm preaching, but I also believe that if I live here much longer, I'll turn into a
dried-up old beanstalk. And all I really want is to be an honest-to-goodness
teenager!
Yours, Anne
WEDNESDAY EVENING, JANUARY 19, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
I (there I go again!) don't know what's happened, but since my dream I keep noticing
how I've changed. By the way, I dreamed about Peter again last night and once again I
felt his eyes penetrate mine, but this dream was less vivid and not quite as beautiful
as the last.
You know that I always used to be jealous of Margot's relationship with Father.
There's not a trace of my jealousy left now; I still feel hurt when Father's nerves
cause him to be unreasonable toward me, but then I think, "I can't blame you for
being the way you are. You talk so much about the minds of children and adolescents,
but you don't know the first thing about them!" I long for more than Father's
affection, more than his hugs and kisses. Isn't it awful of me to be so preoccupied
with myself? Shouldn't I, who want to be good and kind, forgive them first? I forgive
Mother too, but every time she makes a sarcastic remark or laughs at me, it's all I
can do to control myself.
I know I'm far from being what I should; will I ever be?
Anne Frank
P.S. Father asked if I told you about the cake. For Mother's birthday, she received a
real mocha cake, prewar quality, from the office. It was a really nice day! But at the
moment there's no room in my head for things like that.
SATURDAY, JANUARY 22, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Can you tell me why people go to such lengths to hide their real selves? Or why I
always behave very differently when I'm in the company of others? Why do people
have so little trust in one another? I know there must be a reason, but sometimes I
think it's horrible that you can't ever confide in anyone, not even those closest to you.
It seems as if I've grown up since the night I had that dream, as if I've become more
independent. You'll be amazed when I tell you that even my attitude toward the van
Daans has changed. I've stopped looking at all the discussions and arguments from my
family's biased point of view. What's brought on such a radical change? Well, you see,
I suddenly realized that if Mother had been different, if she'd been a real mom, our
relationship would have been very, very different. Mrs. van Daan is by no means a
wonderful person, yet half the arguments could have been avoided if Mother hadn't
been so hard to deal with every time they got onto a tricky subject. Mrs. van Daan
does have one good point, though: you can talk to her. She may be selfish, stingy and
underhanded, but she'll readily back down as long as you don't provoke her and make
her unreasonable. This tactic doesn't work every time, but if you're patient, you can
keep trying and see how far you get.
All the conflicts about our upbringing, about not pampering children, about the food
-- about everything, absolutely everything -- might have taken a different turn if
we'd remained open and on friendly terms instead of always seeing the worst side.
I know exactly what you're going to say, Kitty.
"But, Anne, are these words really coming from your lips? From you, who have had to
put up with so many unkind words from upstairs? From you, who are aware of all the
injustices?"
And yet they are coming from me. I want to take a fresh look at things and form my
own opinion, not just ape my parents, as in the proverb "The apple never falls far
from the tree." I want to reexamine the van Daans and decide for myself what's true
and what's been blown out of proportion. If I wind up being disappointed in them, I
can always side with Father and Mother. But if not, I can try to change their attitude.
And if that doesn't work, I'll have to stick with my own opinions and judgment. I'll
take every opportunity to speak openly to Mrs. van D. about our many differences and
not be afraid -- despite my reputation as a smart aleck -- to offer my impartial
opinion. I won't say anything negative about my own family, though that doesn't mean
I won't defend them if somebody else does, and as of today, my gossiping is a thing
of the past.
Up to now I was absolutely convinced that the van Daans were entirely to blame for
the quarrels, but now I'm sure the fault was largely ours. We were right as far as the
subject matter was concerned, but intelligent people (such as ourselves!) should have
more insight into how to deal with others.
I hope I've got at least a touch of that insight, and that I'll find an occasion to put it
to good use.
Yours, Anne
MONDAY, JANUARY 24, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
A very strange thing has happened to me. (Actually, "happened" isn't quite the right
word.)
Before I came here, whenever anyone at home or at school talked about sex, they
were either secretive or disgusting. Any words having to do with sex were spoken in
a low whisper, and kids who weren't in the know were often laughed at. That struck
me as odd, and I often wondered why people were so mysterious or obnoxious when
they talked about this subject. But because I couldn't change things, I said as little as
possible or asked my girlfriends for information.
After I'd learned quite a lot, Mother once said to me, "Anne, let me give you some
good advice. Never discuss this with boys, and if they bring it up, don't answer them."
I still remember my exact reply. "No, of course not," I exclaimed. "Imagine!" And
nothing more was said.
When we first went into hiding, Father often told me about things I'd rather have
heard from Mother, and I learned the rest from books or things I picked up in
conversations.
Peter van Daan wasn't ever as obnoxious about this subject as the boys at school. Or
maybe just once or twice, in the beginning, though he wasn't trying to get me to talk.
Mrs. van Daan once told us she'd never discussed these matters with Peter, and as far
as she knew, neither had her husband. Apparently she didn't even know how much
Peter knew or where he got his information.
Yesterday, when Margot, Peter and I were peeling potatoes, the conversation somehow
turned to Boche. "We're still not sure whether Boche is a boy or a girl, are we?" I
asked.
Yes we are, he answered. "Boche is a tomcat."
I began to laugh. "Some tomcat if he's pregnant."
Peter and Margot joined in the laughter. You see, a month or two ago Peter informed
us that Boche was sure to have kittens before long, because her stomach was rapidly
swelling. However, Boche's fat tummy turned out to be due to a bunch of stolen
bones. No kittens were growing inside, much less about to be born.
Peter felt called upon to defend himself against my accusation. "Come with me. You
can see for yourself. I was horsing around with the cat one day, and I could definitely
see it was a 'he.' "
Unable to restrain my curiosity, I went with him to the warehouse. Boche, however,
wasn't receiving visitors at that hour, and was nowhere in sight. We waited for a
while, but when it got cold, we went back upstairs.
Later that afternoon I heard Peter go downstairs for the second time. I mustered the
courage to walk through the silent house by myself and reached the warehouse. Boche
was on the packing table, playing with Peter, who was getting ready to put him on the
scale and weigh him.
"Hi, do you want to have a look?" Without any preliminaries, he picked up the cat,
turned him over on his back, deftly held his head and paws and began the lesson.
"This is the male sexual organ, these are a few stray hairs, and that's his backside."
The cat flipped himself over and stood up on his little white feet.
If any other boy had pointed out the "male sexual organ" to me, I would never have
given him a second glance. But Peter went on talking in a normal voice about what is
otherwise a very awkward subject. Nor did he have any ulterior motives. By the time
he'd finished, I felt so much at ease that I started acting normally too. We played
with Boche, had a good time, chatted a bit and finally sauntered through the long
warehouse to the door. "Were you there when Mouschi was fixed?"
"Yeah, sure. It doesn't take long. They give the cat an anesthetic, of course."
"Do they take something out?"
"No, the vet just snips the tube. There's nothing to see on the outside."
I had to get up my nerve to ask a question, since it wasn't as "normal" as I thought.
"Peter, the German word Geschlechtsteil means 'sexual organ,' doesn't it? But then the
male and female ones have different names."
"I know that."
"The female one is a vagina, that I know, but I don't know what it's called in males."
"Oh well," I said. "How are we supposed to know these words? Most of the time you
just come across them by accident."
"Why wait? I'll ask my parents. They know more than I do and they've had more
experience."
We were already on the stairs, so nothing more was said.
Yes, it really did happen. I'd never have talked to a girl about this in such a normal
tone of voice. I'm also certain that this isn't what Mother meant when she warned me
about boys.
All the same, I wasn't exactly my usual self for the rest of the day. When I thought
back to our talk, it struck me as odd. But I've learned at least one thing: there are
young people, even those of the opposite sex, who can discuss these things naturally,
without cracking jokes.
Is Peter really going to ask his parents a lot of questions? Is he really the way he
seemed yesterday?
Oh, what do I know?!!!
Yours, Anne
FRIDAY, JANUARY 28, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
In recent weeks I've developed a great liking for family trees and the genealogical
tables of royal families. I've come to the conclusion that once you begin your search,
you have to keep digging deeper and deeper into the past, which leads you to even
more interesting discoveries.
Although I'm extremely diligent when it comes to my schoolwork and can pretty much
follow the BBC Home Service on the radio, I still spend many of my Sundays sorting
out and looking over my movie-star collection, which has grown to a very respectable
size. Mr. Kugler makes me happy every Monday by bringing me a copy of Cinema &
Theater magazine. The less worldly members of our household often refer to this
small indulgence as a waste of money, yet they never fail to be surprised at how
accurately I can list the actors in any given movie, even after a year. Bep, who often
goes to the movies with her boyfriend on her day off, tells me on
Saturday the name of the show they're going to see, and I then proceed to rattle off
the names of the leading actors and actresses and the reviews. Moms recently
remarked ; that I wouldn't need to go to the movies later on, because !
I know all the plots, the names of the stars and the reviews by heart.
Whenever I come sailing in with a new hairstyle, I I can read the disapproval on their
faces, and I can be sure someone will ask which movie star I'm trying to imitate. My
reply, that it's my own invention, is greeted with ~ skepticism. As for the hairdo, it
doesn't hold its set for ~ more than half an hour. By that time I'm so sick and tired i
of their remarks that I race to the bathroom and restore my hair to its normal mass
of curls.
Yours, Anne
FRIDAY, JANUARY 28, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
This morning I was wondering whether you ever felt like a cow, having to chew my
stale news over and over again until you're so fed up with the monotonous fare that
you yawn and secretly wish Anne would dig up something new.
Sorry, I know you find it dull as ditchwater, but imagine how sick and tired I am of
hearing the same old stuff. If the talk at mealtime isn't about politics or good food,
then Mother or Mrs. van D. trot out stories about their childhood that we've heard a
thousand times before, or Dussel goes on and on about beautiful racehorses, his
Charlotte's extensive wardrobe, leaky rowboats, boys who can swim at the age of four,
aching muscles and frightened patients. It all boils down to this: whenever one of the
eight of us opens his mouth, the other seven can finish the story for him. We know
the punch line of every joke before it gets told, so that whoever's telling it is left to
laugh alone. The various milkmen, grocers and butchers of the two former housewives
have been praised to the skies or run into the ground so many times that in our
imaginations they've grown as old as Methuselah; there's absolutely no chance of
anything new or fresh being brought up for discussion in the Annex.
Still, all this might be bearable if only the grown-ups weren't in the habit of repeating
the stories we hear from Mr. Kleiman, jan or Miep, each time embellishing them with
a few details of their own, so that I often have to pinch my arm under the table to
keep myself from setting the enthusiastic storyteller on the right track. Little children,
such as Anne, must never, ever correct their elders, no matter how many blunders
they make or how often they let their imaginations run away with them.
Jan and Mr. Kleiman love talking about people who have gone underground or into
hiding; they know we're eager to hear about others in our situation and that we truly
sympathize with the sorrow of those who've been arrested as well as the joy of
prisoners who've been freed.
Going underground or into hiding has become as routine as the proverbial pipe and
slippers that used to await the man of the house after a long day at work. There are
many resistance groups, such as Free Netherlands, that forge identity cards, provide
financial support to those in hiding, organize hiding places and find work for young
Christians who go underground. It's amazing how much these generous and unselfish
people do, risking their own lives to help and save others.
The best example of this is our own helpers, who have managed to pull us through so
far and will hopefully bring us safely to shore, because otherwise they'll find
themselves sharing the fate of those they're trying to protect. Never have they uttered
a single word about the burden we must be, never have they complained that we're
too much trouble. They come upstairs every day and talk to the men about business
and politics, to the women about food and wartime difficulties and to the children
about books and newspapers. They put on their most cheerful expressions, bring
flowers and gifts for birthdays and holidays and are always ready to do what they can.
That's something we should never forget; while others display their heroism in battle
or against the Germans, our helpers prove theirs every day by their good spirits and
affection.
The most bizarre stories are making the rounds, yet most of them are really true. For
instance, Mr. Kleiman reported this week that a soccer match was held in the province
of Gelderland; one team consisted entirely of men who had gone underground, and the
other of eleven Military Policemen. In Hilversum, new registration cards were issued.
In order for the many people in hiding to get their rations (you have to show this
card to obtain your ration book or else pay 60 guilders a book), the registrar asked all
those hiding in that district to pick up their cards at a specified hour, when the
documents could be collected at a separate table.
All the same, you have to be careful that stunts like these don't reach the ears of the
Germans.
Yours, Anne
SUNDAY, JANUARY 30, 1944
My dearest Kit,
Another Sunday has rolled around; I don't mind them as much as I did in the
beginning, but they're boring enough.
I still haven't gone to the warehouse yet, but maybe sometime soon. Last night I went
downstairs in the dark, all by myself, after having been there with Father a few nights
before. I stood at the top of the stairs while German planes flew back and forth, and I
knew I was on my own, that I couldn't count on others for support. My fear vanished.
I looked up at the sky and trusted in God.
I have an intense need to be alone. Father has noticed I'm not my usual self, but I
can't tell him what's bothering me. All I want to do is scream "Let me be, leave me
alone!"
Who knows, perhaps the day will come when I'm left alone more than I'd like!
Anne Frank
THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 3, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Invasion fever is mounting daily throughout the country. If you were here, I'm sure
you'd be as impressed as I am at the many preparations, though you'd no doubt laugh
at all the fuss we're making. Who knows, it may all be for nothing!
The papers are full of invasion news and are driving everyone insane with such
statements as: "In the event of a British landing in Holland, the Germans will do what
they can to defend the country, even flooding it, if necessary." They've published
maps of Holland with the potential flood areas marked. Since large portions of
Amsterdam were shaded in, our first question was what we should do if the water in
the streets rose to above our waists. This tricky question elicited a variety of
responses:
"It'll be impossible to walk or ride a bike, so we'll have to wade through the water."
"Don't be silly. We'll have to try and swim. We'll all put on our bathing suits and caps
and swim underwater as much as we can, so nobody can see we're Jews."
"Oh, baloney! I can just imagine the ladies swimming with the rats biting their legs!"
(That was a man, of course; we'll see who screams loudest!)
"We won't even be able to leave the house. The warehouse is so unstable it'll collapse
if there's a flood."
"Listen, everyone, all joking aside, we really ought to try and get a boat."
"Why bother? I have a better idea. We can each take a packing crate from the attic
and row with a wooden spoon."
"I'm going to walk on stilts. I used to be a whiz at it when I was young."
"Jan Gies won't need to. He'll let his wife ride piggyback, and then Miep will be on
stilts."
So now you have a rough idea of what's going on, don't you, Kit? This lighthearted
banter is all very amusing, but reality will prove otherwise. The second question about
the invasion was bound to arise: what should we do if the Germans evacuate
Amsterdam?
"Leave the city along with the others. Disguise ourselves as well as we can."
"Whatever happens, don't go outside! The best thing to do is to stay put! The
Germans are capable of herding the entire population of Holland into Germany, where
they'll all die."
"Of course we'll stay here. This is the safest place.
We'll try to talk Kleiman and his family into coming here to live with us. We'll
somehow get hold of a bag of wood shavings, so we can sleep on the floor. Let's ask
Miep and Kleiman to bring some blankets, just in case. And we'll order some extra
cereal grains to supplement the sixty-five pounds we already have. Jan can try to find
some more beans. At the moment we've got about sixty-five pounds of beans and ten
pounds of split peas. And don't forget the fifty cans of vegetables."
"What about the rest, Mother? Give us the latest figures.' ,
"Ten cans of fish, forty cans of milk, twenty pounds of powdered milk, three bottles
of oil, four crocks of butter, four jars of meat, two big jars of strawberries, two jars
of raspberries, twenty jars of tomatoes, ten pounds of oatmeal, nine pounds of rice.
That's it."
Our provisions are holding out fairly well. All the same, we have to feed the office
staff, which means dipping into our stock every week, so it's not as much as it seems.
We have enough coal and firewood, candles too.
"Let's all make little moneybags to hide in our clothes so we can take our money with
us if we need to leave here."
"We can make lists of what to take first in case we have to run for it, and pack our
knapsacks in advance."
"When the time comes, we'll put two people on the lookout, one in the loft at the
front of the house and one in the back."
"Hey, what's the use of so much food if there isn't any water, gas or electricity?"
"We'll have to cook on the wood stove. Filter the water and boil it. We should clean
some big jugs and fill them with water. We can also store water in the three kettles
we use for canning, and in the washtub."
"Besides, we still have about two hundred and thirty pounds of winter potatoes in the
spice storeroom."
All day long that's all I hear. Invasion, invasion, nothing but invasion. Arguments about
going hungry, dying, bombs, fire extinguishers, sleeping bags, identity cards, poison
gas, etc., etc. Not exactly cheerful.
A good example of the explicit warnings of the male contingent is the following
conversation with Jan:
Annex: "We're afraid that when the Germans retreat, they'll take the entire population
with them."
Jan: "That's impossible. They haven't got enough trains."
Annex: "Trains? Do you really think they'd put civilians on trains? Absolutely not.
Everyone would have to hoof it." (Or, as Dussel always says, per pedes apostolorum.)
Jan: "I can't believe that. You're always looking on the dark side. What reason would
they have to round up all the civilians and take them along?"
Annex: "Don't you remember Goebbels saying that if the Germans have to go, they'll
slam the doors to all the occupied territories behind them?"
Jan: "They've said a lot of things."
Annex: "Do you think the Germans are too noble or humane to do it? Their reasoning
is: if we go under, we'll drag everyone else down with us."
Jan: "You can say what you like, I just don't believe
Annex: "It's always the same old story. No one wants to see the danger until it's
staring them in the face."
Jan: "But you don't know anything for sure. You're just making an assumption."
Annex: "Because we've already been through it all ourselves, First in Germany and
then here. What do you think's happening in Russia?"
Jan: "You shouldn't include the Jews. I don't think anyone knows what's going on in
Russia. The British and the Russians are probably exaggerating for propaganda
purposes, just like the Germans."
Annex: "Absolutely not. The BBC has always told the truth. And even if the news is
slightly exaggerated, the facts are bad enough as they are. You can't deny that
millions of peace-loving citizens in Poland and Russia have been murdered or gassed."
I'll spare you the rest of our conversations. I'm very calm and take no notice of all
the fuss. I've reached the point where I hardly care whether I live or die. The world
will keep on turning without me, and I can't do anything to change events anyway. I'll
just let matters take their course and concentrate on studying and hope that everything
will be all right in the end.
Yours, Anne
TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 8, 1944
Dear Kitty,
I can't tell you how I feel. One minute I'm longing for peace and quiet, and the next
for a little fun. We've forgotten how to laugh -- I mean, laughing so hard you can t
stop.
This morning I had "the giggles"; you know, the kind we used to have at school.
Margot and I were giggling like real teenagers.
Last night there was another scene with Mother. Margot was tucking her wool blanket
around her when suddenly she leapt out of bed and carefully examined the blanket.
What do you think she found? A pin! Mother had patched the blanket and forgotten to
take it out. Father shook his head meaningfully and made a comment about how
careless Mother is. Soon afterward Mother came in from the bathroom, and just to
tease her I said, "Du bist doch eine echte Rabenmutter." [Oh, you are cruel.]
Of course, she asked me why I'd said that, and we told her about the pin she'd
overlooked. She immediately assumed her haughtiest expression and said, "You're a
fine one to talk. When you're sewing, the entire floor is covered with pins. And look,
you've left the manicure set lying around again. You never put that away either!"
I said I hadn't used it, and Margot backed me up, since she was the guilty party.
Mother went on talking about how messy I was until I got fed up and said, rather
curtly, "I wasn't even the one who said you were careless. I'm always getting blamed
for other people's mistakes!"
Mother fell silent, and less than a minute later I was obliged to kiss her good-night.
This incident may not have been very important, but these days everything gets on
my nerves.
Anne Mary Frank
SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 12, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
The sun is shining, the sky is deep blue, there's a magnificent breeze, and I'm longing
-- really longing -- for everything: conversation, freedom, friends, being alone. I
long. . . to cry! I feel as if I were about to explode. I know crying would help, but I
can't cry. I'm restless. I walk from one room to another, breathe through the crack in
the window frame, feel my heart beating as if to say, "Fulfill my longing at last. . ."
I think spring is inside me. I feel spring awakening, I feel it in my entire body and
soul. I have to force myself to act normally. I'm in a state of utter confusion, don't
know what to read, what to write, what to do. I only know that I'm longing for
something. . .
Yours, Anne
186 ANNE FRANK
MONDAY, FEBRUARY 14, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
A lot has changed for me since Saturday. What's happened is this: I was longing for
something (and still am), but. . . a small, a very small, part of the problem has been
resolved.
On Sunday morning I noticed, to my great joy (I'll be honest with you), that Peter
kept looking at me. Not in the usual way. I don't know, I can't explain it, but I
suddenly had the feeling he wasn't as in love with Margot as I used to think. All day
long I tried not to look at him too much, because whenever I did, I caught him looking
at me and then -- well, it made me feel wonderful inside, and that's not a feeling I
should have too often.
Sunday evening everyone, except Pim and me, was clustered around the radio,
listening to the "Immortal Music of the German Masters." Dussel kept twisting and
turning the knobs, which annoyed Peter, and the others too. After restraining himself
for half an hour, Peter asked somewhat irritably if he would stop fiddling with the
radio. Dussel replied in his haughtiest tone, "Ich mach' das schon!" [I'll decide that.]
Peter got angry and made an insolent remark. Mr. van Daan sided with him, and
Dussel had to back down. That was it.
The reason for the disagreement wasn't particularly interesting in and of itself, but
Peter has apparently taken the matter very much to heart, because this morning, when
I was rummaging around in the crate of books in the attic, Peter came up and began
telling me what had happened. I didn't know anything about it, but Peter soon realized
he'd found an attentive listener and started warming up to his subject.
"Well, it's like this," he said. "I don't usually talk much, since I know beforehand I'll
just be tongue-tied. I start stuttering and blushing and I twist my words around so
much I finally have to stop, because I can't find the right words. That's what happened
yesterday. I meant to say something entirely different, but once I started, I got all
mixed up. It's awful. I used to have a bad habit, and sometimes I wish I still did:
whenever I was mad at someone, I'd beat them up instead of arguing with them. I
know this method won't get me anywhere, and that's why I admire you. You're never
at a loss for words: you say exactly what you want to say and aren't in the least bit
shy."
"Oh, you're wrong about that," I replied. "Most of what I say comes out very
differently from the way I'd planned. Plus I talk too much and too long, and that's just
as bad."
"Maybe, but you have the advantage that no one can see you're embarrassed. You
don't blush or go to pieces."
I couldn't help being secretly amused at his words. However, since I wanted him to go
on talking quietly about himself, I hid my laughter, sat down on a cushion on the floor,
wrapped my arms around my knees and gazed at him intently.
I'm glad there's someone else in this house who flies into the same rages as I do.
Peter seemed relieved that he could criticize Dussel without being afraid I'd tell. As
for me, I was pleased too, because I sensed a strong feeling of fellowship, which I
only remember having had with my girlfriends.
Yours, Anne
TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 15, 1944
The minor run-in with Dussel had several repercussions, for which he had only
himself to blame. Monday evening Dussel came in to see Mother and told her
triumphantly that Peter had asked him that morning if he'd slept well, and then added
how sorry he was about what had happened Sunday evening -- he hadn't really
meant what he'd said. Dussel assured him he hadn't taken it to heart. So everYthing
was right as rain again. Mother passed this story on to me, and I was secretly amazed
that Peter, who'd been so angry at Dussel, had humbled himself, despite all his
assurances to the contrary.
I couldn't refrain from sounding Peter out on the subject, and he instantly replied that
Dussel had been lying. You should have seen Peter's face. I wish I'd had a camera.
Indignation, rage, indecision, agitation and much more crossed his face in rapid
succession.
That evening Mr. van Daan and Peter really told Dussel off. But it couldn't have been
all that bad, since Peter had another dental appointment today.
Actually, they never wanted to speak to each other again.
WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 16, 1944
Peter and I hadn't talked to each other all day, except for a few meaningless words. It
was too cold to go up to the attic, and anyway, it was Margot's birthday. At
twelve-thirty he came to look at the presents and hung around chatting longer than
was strictly necessary, something he'd never have done otherwise. But I got my
chance in the afternoon. Since I felt like spoiling Margot on her birthday, I went to
get the coffee, and after that the potatoes. When I came to Peter's room, he
immediately took his papers off the stairs, and I asked if I should close the trapdoor
to the attic.
"Sure," he said, "go ahead. When you're ready to come back down, just knock and I'll
open it for you."
I thanked him, went upstairs and spent at least ten minutes searching around in the
barrel for the smallest potatoes. My back started aching, and the attic was cold.
Naturally, I didn't bother to knock but opened the trap-door myself. But he obligingly
got up and took the pan out of my hands.
"I did my best, but I couldn't find any smaller ones."
"Did you look in the big barrel?"
"Yes, I've been through them all."
By this time I was at the bottom of the stairs, and he examined the pan of potatoes
he was still holding. "Oh, but these are fine," he said, and added, as I took the pan
from him, "My compliments!"
As he said this, he gave me such a warm, tender look that I started glowing inside. I
could tell he wanted to please me, but since he couldn't make a long complimentary
speech, he said everything with his eyes. I understood him so well and was very
grateful. It still makes me happy to think back to those words and that look!
When I went downstairs, Mother said she needed more potatoes, this time for dinner,
so I volunteered to go back up. When I entered Peter's room, I apologized for
disturbing him again. As I was going up the stairs, he stood up, went over to stand
between the stairs and the wall, grabbed my arm and tried to stop me.
"I'll go," he said. "I have to go upstairs anyway."
I replied that it wasn't really necessary, that I didn't have to get only the small ones
this time. Convinced, he let go of my arm. On my way back, he opened the trapdoor
and once again took the pan from me. Standing by the door, I asked, "What are you
working on?"
"French," he replied.
I asked if I could take a look at his lessons. Then I went to wash my hands and sat
down across from him on the divan.
After I'd explained some French to him, we began to talk. He told me that after the
war he wanted to go to the Dutch East Indies and live on a rubber plantation. He
talked about his life at home, the black market and how he felt like a worthless bum.
I told him he had a big inferiority complex. He talked about the war, saying that
Russia and England were bound to go to war against each other, and about the Jews.
He said life would have been much easier if he'd been a Christian or could become
one after the war. I asked if he wanted to be baptized, but that wasn't what he meant
either. He said he'd never be able to feel like a Christian, but that after the war he'd
make sure nobody would know he was Jewish. I felt a momentary pang. It's such a
shame he still has a touch of dishonesty in him.
Peter added, "The Jews have been and always will be the chosen people!"
I answered, "Just this once, I hope they'll be chosen for something good!"
But we went on chatting very pleasantly, about Father, about judging human character
and all sorts of things, so many that I can't even remember them all.
I left at a quarter past five, because Bep had arrived.
That evening he said something else I thought was nice. We were talking about the
picture of a movie star I'd once given him, which has been hanging in his room for at
least a year and a half. He liked it so much that I offered to give him a few more.
"No," he replied, "I'd rather keep the one I've got. I look at it every day, and the
people in it have become my friends."
I now have a better understanding of why he always hugs Mouschi so tightly. He
obviously needs affection too. I forgot to mention something else he was talking about.
He said, "No, I'm not afraid, except when it comes to things about myself, but I'm
working on that."
Peter has a huge inferiority complex. For example, he always thinks he's so stupid and
we're so smart. When I help him with French, he thanks me a thousand times. One of
these days I'm going to say, "Oh, cut it out! You're much better at English and
geography!"
Anne Frank
THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 17, 1944
Dear Kitty,
I was upstairs this morning, since I promised Mrs. van D. I'd read her some of my
stories. I began with "Eva's Dream," which she liked a lot, and then I read a few
passages from "The Secret Annex," which had her in stitches. Peter also listened for a
while (just the last part) and asked if I'd come to his room sometime to read more.
I decided I had to take a chance right then and there, so I got my notebook and let
him read that bit where Cady and Hans talk about God. I can't really tell what kind of
impression it made on him. He said something I don't quite remember, not about
whether it was good, but about the idea behind it. I told him I just wanted him to see
that I didn't write only amusing things. He nodded, and I left the room. We'll see if I
hear anything more!
Yours, Anne Frank
FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 18, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
Whenever I go upstairs, it's always so I can see "him." Now that I have something to
look forward to, my life here has improved greatly.
At least the object of my friendship is always here, and I don't have to be afraid of
rivals (except for Margot). Don't think I'm in love, because I'm not, but I do have the
feeling that something beautiful is going to develop between Peter and me, a kind of
friendship and a feeling of trust. I go see him whenever I get the chance, and it's not
the way it used to be, when he didn't know what to make of me. On the contrary,
he's still talking away as I'm heading out the door. Mother doesn't like me going
upstairs. She always says I'm bothering Peter and that I should leave him alone.
Honestly, can't she credit me with some intuition? She always looks at me so oddly
when I go to Peter's room. When I come down again, she asks me where I've been.
It's terrible, but I'm beginning to hate her!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 19, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
It's Saturday again, and that should tell you enough. This morning all was quiet. I
spent nearly an hour upstairs making meatballs, but I only spoke to "him" in passing.
When everyone went upstairs at two-thirty to either read or take a nap, I went
downstairs, with blanket and all, to sit at the desk and read or write. Before long I
couldn't take it anymore. I put my head in my arms and sobbed my heart out. The
tears streamed down my cheeks, and I felt desperately unhappy. Oh, if only' 'he" had
come to comfort me.
It was past four by the time I went upstairs again. At five o'clock I set off to get
some potatoes, hoping once again that we'd meet, but while I was still in the bathroom
fixing my hair, he went to see Boche.
I wanted to help Mrs. van D. and went upstairs with my book and everything, but
suddenly I felt the tears coming again. I raced downstairs to the bathroom, grabbing
the hand mirror on the way. I sat there on the toilet, fully dressed, long after I was
through, my tears leaving dark spots on the red of my apron, and I felt utterly
dejected.
Here's what was going through my mind: "Oh, I'll never reach Peter this way. Who
knows, maybe he doesn't even like me and he doesn't need anyone to confide in.
Maybe he only thinks of me in a casual sort of way. I'll have to go back to being
alone, without anyone to confide in and without Peter, without hope, comfort or
anything to look forward to. Oh, if only I could rest my head on his shoulder and not
feel so hopelessly alone and deserted! Who knows, maybe he doesn't care for me at
all and looks at the others in the same tender way. Maybe I only imagined it was
especially for me. Oh, Peter, if only you could hear me or see me. If the truth is
disappointing, I won't be able to bear it."
A little later I felt hopeful and full of expectation again, though my tears were still
flowing -- on the inside.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 20, 1944
What happens in other people's houses during the rest of the week happens here in
the Annex on Sundays. While other people put on their best clothes and go strolling in
the sun, we scrub, sweep and do the laundry.
Eight o'clock. Though the rest of us prefer to sleep in,
Dussel gets up at eight. He goes to the bathroom, then downstairs, then up again and
then to the bathroom, where he devotes a whole hour to washing himself.
Nine-thirty. The stoves are lit, the blackout screen is taken down, and Mr. van Daan
heads for the bathroom. One of my Sunday morning ordeals is having to lie in bed and
look at Dussel's back when he's praying. I know it sounds strange, but a praying
Dussel is a terrible sight to behold. It's not that he cries or gets sentimental, not at
all, but he does spend a quarter of an hour -- an entire fifteen minutes -- rocking
from his toes to his heels. Back and forth, back and forth. It goes on forever, and if I
don't shut my eyes tight, my head starts to spin.
Ten-fifteen. The van Daans whistle; the bathroom's free. In the Frank family quarters,
the first sleepy faces are beginning to emerge from their pillows. Then everything
happens fast, fast, fast. Margot and I take turns doing the laundry. Since it's quite
cold downstairs, we put on pants and head scarves. Meanwhile, Father is busy in the
bathroom. Either Margot or I have a turn in the bathroom at eleven, and then we're all
clean.
Eleven-thirty. Breakfast. I won't dwell on this, since there's enough talk about food
without my bringing the subject up as well.
Twelve-fifteen. We each go our separate ways. Father, clad in overalls, gets down on
his hands and knees and brushes the rug so vigorously that the room is enveloped in a
cloud of dust. Mr. Dussel makes the beds (all wrong, of course), always whistling the
same Beethoven violin concerto as he goes about his work. Mother can be heard
shuffling around the attic as she hangs up the washing. Mr. van Daan puts on his hat
and disappears into the lower regions, usually followed by Peter and Mouschi. Mrs.
van D. dons a long apron, a black wool jacket and overshoes, winds a red wool scarf
around her head, scoops up a bundle of dirty laundry and, with a well-rehearsed
washerwoman's nod, heads downstairs. Margot and I do the dishes and straighten up
the room.
WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 23,1944
My dearest Kitty,
The weather's been wonderful since yesterday, and I've perked up quite a bit. My
writing, the best thing I have, is coming along well. I go to the attic almost every
morning to get the stale air out of my lungs. This morning when I went there, Peter
was busy cleaning up. He finished quickly and came over to where I was sitting on
my favorite spot on the floor. The two of us looked out at the blue sky, the bare
chestnut tree glistening with dew, the seagulls and other birds glinting with silver as
they swooped through the air, and we were so moved and entranced that we couldn't
speak. He stood with his head against a thick beam, while I sat. We breathed in the
air, looked outside and both felt that the spell shouldn't be broken with words. We
remained like this for a long while, and by the time he had to go to the loft to chop
wood, I knew he was a good, decent boy. He climbed the ladder to the loft, and I
followed; during the fifteen minutes he was chopping wood, we didn't say a word
either. I watched him from where I was standing, and could see he was obviously
doing his best to chop the right way and show off his strength. But I also looked out
the open window, letting my eyes roam over a large part of Amsterdam, over the
rooftops and on to the horizon, a strip of blue so pale it was almost invisible.
"As long as this exists," I thought, "this sunshine and this cloudless sky, and as long
as I can enjoy it, how can I be sad?"
The best remedy for those who are frightened, lonely or unhappy is to go outside,
somewhere they can be alone, alone with the sky, nature and God. For then and only
then can you feel that everything is as it should be and that God wants people to be
happy amid nature's beauty and simplicity.
As long as this exists, and that should be forever, I know that there will be solace for
every sorrow, whatever the circumstances. I firmly believe that nature can bring
comfort to all who suffer.
Oh, who knows, perhaps it won't be long before I can share this overwhelming feeling
of happiness with someone who feels the same as I do.
Yours, Anne
P.S. Thoughts: To Peter.
We've been missing out on so much here, so very much, and for such a long time. I
miss it just as much as you do. I'm not talking about external things, since we're well
provided for in that sense; I mean the internal things. Like you, I long for freedom
and fresh air, but I think we've been amply compensated for their loss. On the inside,
I mean.
This morning, when I was sitting in front of the window and taking a long, deep look
outside at God and nature, I was happy, just plain happy. Peter, as long as people feel
that kind of happiness within themselves, the joy of nature, health and much more
besides, they'll always be able to recapture that happiness.
Riches, prestige, everything can be lost. But the happiness in your own heart can only
be dimmed; it will always be there, as long as you live, to make you happy again.
Whenever you're feeling lonely or sad, try going to the loft on a beautiful day and
looking outside. Not at the houses and the rooftops, but at the sky. As long as you
can look fearlessly at the sky, you'll know that you're pure within and will find
happiness once more.
SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 27, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
From early in the morning to late at night, all I do is think about Peter. I fall asleep
with his image before my eyes, dream about him and wake up with him still looking at
me.
I have the strong feeling that Peter and I aren't really as different as we may seem
on the surface, and I'll explain why: neither Peter nor I have a mother. His is too
superficial, likes to flirt and doesn't concern herself much with what goes on in his
head. Mine takes an active interest in my life, but has no tact, sensitivity or motherly
understanding.
Both Peter and I are struggling with our innermost feelings. We're still unsure of
ourselves and are too vulnerable, emotionally, to be dealt with so roughly. Whenever
that happens, I want to run outside or hide my feelings. Instead, I bang the pots and
pans, splash the water and am generally noisy, so that everyone wishes I were miles
away. Peter's reaction is to shut himself up, say little, sit quietly and daydream, all
the while carefully hiding his true self.
But how and when will we finally reach each other?
I don't know how much longer I can continue to keep this yearning under control.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
MONDAY, FEBRUARY 28, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
It's like a nightmare, one that goes on long after I'm awake. I see him nearly every
hour of the day and yet I can't be with him, I can't let the others notice, and I have
to pretend to be cheerful, though my heart is aching.
Peter Schiff and Peter van Daan have melted into one Peter, who's good and kind and
whom I long for desperately. Mother's horrible, Father's nice, which makes him even
more exasperating, and Margot's the worst, since she takes advantage of my smiling
face to claim me for herself, when all I want is to be left alone.
Peter didn't join me in the attic, but went up to the loft to do some carpentry work.
At every rasp and bang, another chunk of my courage broke off and I was even more
unhappy. In the distance a clock was tolling' 'Be pure in heart, be pure in mind!"
I'm sentimental, I know. I'm despondent and foolish, I know that too.
Oh, help me!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 1, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
My own affairs have been pushed to the background by . . . a break-in. I'm boring
you with all my break-ins, but what can I do when burglars take such pleasure in
honoring Gies & Go. with their presence? This incident is much more complicated than
the last one, in July 1943.
Last night at seven-thirty Mr. van Daan was heading, as usual, for Mr. Kugler's office
when he saw that both the glass door and the office door were open. He was
surprised, but he went on through and was even more astonished to see that the
alcove doors were open as well and that there was a terrible mess in the front office.
"There's been a burglary" flashed through his mind. But just to make sure, he went
downstairs to the front door, checked the lock and found everything closed. "Bep and
Peter must just have been very careless this evening," Mr. van. D. concluded. He
remained for a while in Mr. Kugler's office, switched off the lamp and went upstairs
without worrying much about the open doors or the messy office.
Early this morning Peter knocked at our door to tell us that the front door was wide
open and that the projector and Mr. Kugler's new briefcase had disappeared from the
closet. Peter was instructed to lock the door. Mr. van Daan told us his discoveries of
the night before, and we were extremely worried.
The only explanation is that the burglar must have had a duplicate key, since there
were no signs of a forced entry. He must have sneaked in early in the evening, shut
the door behind him, hidden himself when he heard Mr. van Daan, fled with the loot
after Mr. van Daan went upstairs and, in his hurry, not bothered to shut the door.
Who could have our key? Why didn't the burglar go to the warehouse? Was it one of
our own warehouse employees, and will he turn us in, now that he's heard Mr. van
Daan and maybe even seen him?
It's really scary, since we don't know whether the burglar will take it into his head to
try and get in again. Or was he so startled when he heard someone else in the
building that he'll stay away?
Yours, Anne
P.S. We'd be delighted if you could hunt up a good detective for us. Obviously, there's
one condotion: he must be relied upon not to mform on people in hiding.
THURSDAY, MARCH 2, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Margot and I were in the attic together today. I can't enjoy being there with her the
way I imagine it'd be with Peter (or someone else). I know she feels the same about
most things as I do!
While doing the dishes, Bep began talking to Mother and Mrs. van Daan about how
discouraged she gets. What help did those two offer her? Our tactless mother,
especially, only made things go from bad to worse. Do you know what her advice
was? That she should think about all the other people in the world who are suffering!
How can thinking about the misery of others help if you're miserable yourself? I said
as much. Their response, of course, was that I should stay out of conversations of
this sort.
The grown-ups are such idiots! As if Peter, Margot, Bep and I didn't all have the
same feelings. The only thing that helps is a mother's love, or that of a very, very
close friend. But these two mothers don't understand the first thing about us! Perhaps
Mrs. van Daan does, a bit more than Mother. Oh, I wish I could have said something
to poor Bep, something that I know from my own experience would have helped. But
Father came between us, pushing me roughly aside. They're all so stupid!
I also talked to Margot about Father and Mother, about how nice it could be here if
they weren't so aggravating. We'd be able to organize evenings in which everyone
could take turns discussing a given subject. But we've already been through all that.
It's impossible for me to talk here! Mr. van Daan goes on the offensive, Mother i gets
sarcastic and can't say anythina in a normal voice, Father doesn't feel like taking part,
nor does Mr. Dussel, and Mrs. van D. is attacked so often that she just sits there
with a red face, hardly able to put up a fight anymore. And what about us? We aren't
allowed to have an opinion! My, my, aren't they progressive! Not have an opinion!
People can tell you to shut up, but they can't keep you from having an opinion. You
can't forbid someone to have an opinion, no matter how young they are! The only
thing that would help Bep, Margot, Peter and me would be great love and devotion,
which we don't get here. And no one, especially not the idiotic sages around here, is
capable of understanding us, since we're more sensitive and much more advanced in
our thinking than any of them ever suspect!
Love, what is love? I don't think you can really put it into words. Love is
understanding someone, caring for him, sharing his joys and sorrows. This eventually
includes physical love. You've shared something, given something away and received
something in return, whether or not you're married, whether or not you have a baby.
Losing your virtue doesn't matter, as long as you know that for as long as you live
you'll have someone at your side who understands you, and who doesn't have to be
shared with anyone else!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
At the moment, Mother's grouching at me again; she's clearly jealous because I talk to
Mrs. van Daan more than to her. What do I care!
I managed to get hold of Peter this afternoon, and we talked for at least forty-five
minutes. He wanted to tell me something about himself, but didn't find it easy. He
finally got it out, though it took a long time. I honestly didn't know whether it was
better for me to stay or to go. But I wanted so much to help him! I told him about
Bep and how tactless our mothers are. He told me that his parents fight constantly,
about politics and cigarettes and all kinds of things. As I've told you before, Peter's
very shy, but not too shy to admit that he'd be perfectly happy not to see his parents
for a year or two. "My father isn't as nice as he looks," he said. "But in the matter of
the cigarettes, Mother's absolutely right."
I also told him about my mother. But he came to Father's defense. He thought he was
a "terrific guy."
Tonight when I was hanging up my apron after doing the dishes, he called me over
and asked me not to say anything downstairs about his parents' having had another
argument and not being on speaking terms. I promised, though I'd already told Margot.
But I'm sure Margot won't pass it on.
"Oh no, Peter," I said, you don't have to worry about me. I've learned not to blab
everything I hear. I never repeat what you tell me."
He was glad to hear that. I also told him what terrible gossips we are, and said,
"Margot's quite right, of course, when she says I'm not being honest, because as much
as I want to stop gossiping, there's nothing I like better than discussing Mr. Dussel."
"It's good that you admit it," he said. He blushed, and his sincere compliment almost
embarrassed me too.
Then we talked about "upstairs" and "downstairs" some more. Peter was really rather
surprised to hear that don't like his parents. "Peter," I said, "you know I'm always
honest, so why shouldn't I tell you this as well? We can see their faults too."
I added, "Peter, I'd really like to help you. Will you let me? You're caught in an
awkward position, and I know, even though you don't say anything, that it upsets you."
"Oh, your help is always welcome!"
"Maybe it'd be better for you to talk to Father. You can tell him anything, he won't
pass it on."
"I know, he's a real pal."
"You like him a lot, don't you?"
Peter nodded, and I continued, "Well, he likes you too, you know!"
He looked up quickly and blushed. It was really touching to see how happy these few
words made him.
"You think so?" he asked.
"Yes," I said. "You can tell from the little things he lets slip now and then."
Then Mr. van Daan came in to do some dictating.
Peter's a "terrific guy," just like Father!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
FRIDAY, MARCH 3,1944
My dearest Kitty,
When I looked into the candle tonight, I felt calm and happy again. It seems Grandma
is in that candle, and it's Grandma who watches over and protects me and makes me
feel happy again. But. . . there's someone else who governs all my moods and that's. .
. Peter. I went to get the potatoes today, and while I was standing on the stairway
with my pan full, he asked, "What did you do during the lunch break?"
I sat down on the stairs, and we began to talk. The potatoes didn't make it to the
kitchen until five-fifteen (an hour after I'd gone to get them). Peter didn't say
anything more about his parents; we just talked about books and about the past. Oh,
he gazes at me with such warmth in his eyes; I don't think it will take much for me
to fall in love with him.
He brought the subject up this evening. I went to his room after peeling potatoes and
remarked on how hot it was. "You can tell the temperature by looking at Margot and
me, because we turn white when it's cold and red when it's hot." I said.
"In love?" he asked.
"Why should I be in love?" It was a pretty silly answer (or, rather, question).
"Why not?" he said, and then it was time for dinner.
What did he mean? Today I finally managed to ask him whether my chatter bothered
him. All he said was,
"Oh, it's fine with me!" I can't tell how much of his reply was due to shyness.
Kitty, I sound like someone who's in love and can talk about nothing but her dearest
darling. And Peter is a darling. Will I ever be able to tell him that? Only if he thinks
the same of me, but I'm the kind of person you have to treat with kid gloves, I know
that all too well.
And he likes to be left alone, so I don't know how much he likes me. In any case,
we're getting to know each other a little better. I wish we dared to say more. But
who knows, maybe that time will come sooner than I think!
Once or twice a day he gives me a knowing glance, I wink back, and we're both
happy. It seems crazy to talk about his being happy, and yet I have the overwhelming
feeling he thinks the same way I do.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
SATURDAY, MARCH 4, 1944
Dear Kitty,
This is the first Saturday in months that hasn't been tiresome, dreary and boring. The
reason is Peter. This morning as I was on my way to the attic to hang up my apron,
Father asked whether I wanted to stay and practice my French, and I said yes. We
spoke French together for a while and I explained something to Peter, and then we
worked on our English. Father read aloud from Dickens, and I was in seventh heaven,
since I was sitting on Father's chair, close to Peter.
I went downstairs at quarter to eleven. When I went back up at eleven-thirty, Peter
was already waiting for me on the stairs. We talked until quarter to one. Whenever I
leave the room, for example after a meal, and Peter has a chance and no one else can
hear, he says, "Bye, Anne, see you later."
Oh, I'm so happy! I wonder if he's going to fall in love with me after all? In any case,
he's a nice boy, and you have no idea how good it is to talk to him!
Mrs. van D. thinks it's all right for me to talk to
Peter, but today she asked me teasingly, "Can I trust you two up there?"
"Of course," I protested. "I take that as an insult!"
Morning, noon and night, I look forward to seeing Peter.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
PS. Before I forget, last night everything was blanketed in snow. Now it's thawed and
there's almost nothing left.
MONDAY, MARCH 6, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Ever since Peter told me about his parents, I've felt a certain sense of responsibthty
toward him-don't you think that's strange? It's as though their quarrels were just as
much my business as his, and yet I don't dare bring it up anymore, because I'm afraid
it makes him uncomfortable. I wouldn't want to intrude, not for all the money in the
world.
I can tell by Peter's face that he ponders things just as deeply as I do. Last night I
was annoyed when Mrs. van D. scoffed, "The thinker!" Peter flushed and looked
embarrassed, and I nearly blew my top.
Why don't these people keep their mouths shut?
You can't imagine what it's like to have to stand on the sidelines and see how lonely
he is, without being able to do anything. I can imagine, as if I were in his place, how
despondent he must sometimes feel at the quarrels. And about love. Poor Peter, he
needs to be loved so much!
It sounded so cold when he said he didn't need any friends. Oh, he's so wrong! I don't
think he means it. He clings to his masculinity, his solitude and his feigned indifference so he can maintain his role, so he'll never, ever have to show his feelings.
Poor Peter, how long can he keep it up? Won't he explode from this superhuman
effort?
Oh, Peter, if only I could help you, if only you would let me! Together we could
banish our loneliness, yours and mine!
I've been doing a great deal of thinking, but not saying much. I'm happy when I see
him, and happier still if the sun shines when we're together. I washed my hair
yesterday, and because I knew he was next door, I was very rambunctious. I couldn't
help it; the more quiet and serious I am on the inside, the noisier I get on the
outside!
Who will be the first to discover the chink in my armor?
It's just as well that the van Daans don't have a daughter. My conquest could never be
so challenging, so beautiful and so nice with someone of the same sex!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
PS. You know I'm always honest with you, so I think I should tell you that I live from
one encounter to the next. I keep hoping to discover that he's dying to see me, and
I'm in raptures when I notice his bashful attempts. I think he'd like to be able to
express himself as easily as I do; little does he know it's his awkwardness that I find
so touching.
TUESDAY, MARCH 7,1944
Dearest Kitty,
When I think back to my life in 1942, it all seems so unreal. The Anne Frank who
enjoyed that heavenly existence was completely different from the one who has grown
wise within these walls. Yes, it was heavenly. Five admirers on every street corner,
twenty or so friends, the favorite of most of my teachers, spoiled rotten by Father
and Mother, bags full of candy and a big allowance. What more could anyone ask for?
You're probably wondering how I could have charmed all those people. Peter says It s
ecause I m "attractive," but that isn't it entirely. The teachers were amused and
entertained by my clever answers, my witty remarks, my smthng face and my critical
mind. That's all I was: a terrible flirt, coquettish and amusing. I had a few plus points,
which kept me in everybody's good graces: I was hardworking, honest and generous. I
would never have refused anyone who wanted to peek at my answers, I was
magnanimous with my candy, and I wasn't stuck-up.
Would all that admiration eventually have made me overconfident? It's a good thing
that, at the height of my glory, I was suddenly plunged into reality. It took me more
than a year to get used to doing without admiration.
How did they see me at school? As the class comedian, the eternal ringleader, never
in a bad mood, never a crybaby. Was it any wonder that everyone wanted to bicycle
to school with me or do me little favors?
I look back at that Anne Frank as a pleasant, amusing, but superficial girl, who has
nothing to do with me. What did Peter say about me? "Whenever I saw you, you were
surrounded by a flock of girls and at least two boys, you were always laughing, and
you were always the center of attention!" He was right.
What's remained of that Anne Frank? Oh, I haven't forgotten how to laugh or toss off
a remark, I'm just as good, if not better, at raking people over the coals, and I can
still flirt and be amusing, if I want to be . . .
But there's the catch. I'd like to live that seemingly carefree and happy life for an
evening, a few days, a week. At the end of that week I'd be exhausted, and would be
grateful to the first person to talk to me about something meaningful. I want friends,
not admirers. Peo- ple who respect me for my character and my deeds, not my
flattering smile. The circle around me would be much smaller, but what does that
matter, as long as they're sincere?
In spite of everything, I wasn't altogether happy in 1942; I often felt I'd been
deserted, but because I was on the go all day long, I didn't think about it. I enjoyed
myself as much as I could, trying consciously or unconsciously to fill the void with
jokes.
Looking back, I realize that this period of my life has irrevocably come to a close; my
happy-go-lucky, carefree schooldays are gone forever. I don't even miss them. I've
outgrown them. I can no longer just kid around, since my serious side is always there.
I see my life up to New Year's 1944 as if I were looking through a powerful
magnifying glass. When I was at home, my life was filled with sunshine. Then, in the
middle of 1942, everything changed overnight. The quarrels, the accusations -- I
couldn't take it all in. I was caught off guard, and the only way I knew to keep my
bearings was to talk back.
The first half of 1943 brought crying spells, loneliness and the gradual realization of
my faults and short- comings, which were numerous and seemed even more so. I
filled the day with chatter, tried to draw Pim closer to me and failed. This left me on
my own to face the difficult task of improving myself so I wouldn't have to hear their
reproaches, because they made me so despondent.
The second half of the year was slightly better. I became a teenager, and was treated
more like a grown-up. I began to think about things and to write stories, finally
coming to the conclusion that the others no longer had anything to do with me. They
had no right to swing me back and forth like a pendulum on a clock. I wanted to
change myself in my own way. I realized I could man- age without my mother,
completely and totally, and that hurt. But what affected me even more was the
realization that I was never going to be able to confide in Father. I didn't trust anyone
but myself.
After New Year's the second big change occurred: my dream, through which I
discovered my longing for . . . a boy; not for a girlfriend, but for a boyfriend. I also
discovered an inner happiness underneath my superficial and cheerful exterior. From
time to time I was quiet. Now I live only for Peter, since what happens to me in the
future depends largely on him!
I lie in bed at night, after ending my prayers with the words "Ich Janke air fur all das
Cute una Liebe una Schone,"* [* Thank you, God, for all that is good and dear and
beautiful.] and I'm filled with joy. I think of going into hiding, my health and my
whole being as das Cute; Peter's love (which is still so new and fragile and which
neither of us dares to say aloud), the future, happiness and love as das Liebe; the
world, nature and the tremendous beauty of everything, all that splendor, as das
Schone.
At such moments I don't think about all the misery, but about the beauty that still
remains. This is where Mother and I differ greatly. Her advice in the face of
melancholy is: "Think about all the suffering in the world and be thankful you're not
part of it." My advice is: "Go outside, to the country, enjoy the sun and all nature has
to offer. Go outside and try to recapture the happiness within yourself; think of all the
beauty in yourself and in everything around you and be happy."
I don't think Mother's advice can be right, because what are you supposed to do if
you become part of the suffering? You'd be completely lost. On the contrary, beauty
remains, even in misfortune. If you just look for it, you discover more and more
happiness and regain your balance. A person who's happy will make others happy; a
person who has courage and faith will never die in misery!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 8, 1944
Margot and I have been writing each other notes, just for fun, of course.
Anne: It's strange, but I can only remember the day after what has happened the night
before. For example, I suddenly remembered that Mr. Dussel was snoring loudly last
night. (It's now quarter to three on Wednesday af- ternoon and Mr. Dussel is snoring
again, which is why it flashed through my mind, of course.) When I had to use the
potty, I deliberately made more noise to get the snoring to stop.
Margot: Which is better, the snoring or the gasping for air?
Anne: The snoring's better, because it stops when I make noise, without waking the
person in question.
What I didn't write to Margot, but what I'll confess to you, dear Kitty, is that I've
been dreaming of Peter a great deal. The night before last I dreamed I was skating
right here in our living room with that little boy from the Apollo ice-skating rink; he
was with his sister, the girl with the spindly legs who always wore the same blue
dress. I introduced myself, overdoing it a bit, and asked him his name. It was Peter.
In my dream I wondered just how many Peters I actually knew!
Then I dreamed we were standing in Peter's room, facing each other beside the stairs.
I said something to him; he gave me a kiss, but replied that he didn't love me all that
much and that I shouldn't flirt. In a desperate and pleading voice I said, "I'm not
flirting, Peter!"
When I woke up, I was glad Peter hasn't said it after all.
Last night I dreamed we were kissing each other, but
Peter's cheeks were very disappointing: they weren't as soft as they looked. They
were more like Father's cheeks -- the cheeks of a man who already shaves.
FRIDAY, MARCH 10, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
The proverb "Misfortunes never come singly" defi- nitely applies to today. Peter just
got through saying it. Let me tell you all the awful things that have happened and that
are still hanging over our heads.
First, Miep is sick, as a result of Henk and Aagje's wedding yesterday. She caught
cold in the Westerkerk, where the service was held. Second, Mr. Kleiman hasn't
returned to work since the last time his stomach started bleeding, so Bep's been left
to hold down the fort alone. Third, the police have arrested a man (whose name I
won't put in writing). It's terrible not only for him, but for us as well, since he's been
supplying us with potatoes, butter and jam. Mr. M., as I'll call him, has five children
under the age of thirteen, and another on the way.
Last night we had another little scare: we were in the middle of dinner when suddenly
someone knocked on the wall next door. For the rest of the evening we were nervous
and gloomy.
Lately I haven't been at all in the mood to write down what's been going on here. I've
been more wrapped up in myself. Don't get me wrong, I'm terribly upset about what's
happened to poor, good-hearted Mr. M., but there's not much room for him in my
diary.
Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday I was in Peter's room from four-thirty to
five-fifteen. We worked on our French and chatted about one thing and another. I
really look forward to that hour or so in the afternoon, but best of all is that I think
Peter's just as pleased to see me.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL 213
SATURDAY, MARCH 11, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
I haven't been able to sit still lately. I wander up- stairs and down and then back
again. I like talking to Peter, but I'm always afraid of being a nuisance. He's told me a
bit about the past, about his parents and about himself, but it's not enough, and every
five minutes I wonder why I find myself longing for more. He used to think I was a
real pain in the neck, and the feeling was mutual. I've changed my mind, but how do I
know he's changed his? I think he has, but that doesn't necessarily mean we have to
become the best of friends, although as far as I'm concerned, it would make our time
here more bearable. But I won't let this drive me crazy. I spend enough time thinking
about him and don't have to get you all worked up as well, simply because I'm so
miserable!
SUNDAY, MARCH 12, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Things are getting crazier here as the days go by.
Peter hasn't looked at me since yesterday. He's been acting as if he's mad at me. I'm
doing my best not to chase after him and to talk to him as little as possible, but it's
not easy! What's going on, what makes him keep me at arm's length one minute and
rush back to my side the next? Perhaps I'm imagining that it's worse than it really is.
Perhaps he's just moody like me, and tomorrow everything will be all right again!
I have the hardest time trying to maintain a normal facade when I'm feeling so
wretched and sad. I have to talk, help around the house, sit with the others and,
above all, act cheerful! Most of all I miss the outdoors and having a place where I can
be alone for as long as I want! I think I'm getting everything all mixed up, Kitty, but
then, I'm in a state of utter confusion: on the one hand, I'm half crazy with desire for
him, can hardly be in the same room without looking at him; and on the other hand, I
wonder why he should matter to me so much and why I can't be calm again!
Day and night, during every waking hour, I do nothing but ask myself, "Have you
given him enough chance to be alone? Have you been spending too much time
upstairs? Do you talk too much about serious subjects he's not yet ready to talk
about? Maybe he doesn't even like you? Has it all been your imagination? But then
why has he told you so much about himself? Is he sorry he did?" And a whole lot
more.
Yesterday afternoon I was so worn out by the sad news from the outside that I lay
down on my divan for a nap. All I wanted was to sleep and not have to think. I slept
until four, but then I had to go next door. It wasn't easy, answering all Mother's
questions and inventing an excuse to explain my nap to Father. I pleaded a headache,
which wasn't a lie, since I did have one. . . on the inside!
Ordinary people, ordinary girls, teenagers like myself, would think I'm a little nuts
with all my self-pity. But that's just it. I pour my heart out to you, and the rest of
the time I'm as impudent, cheerful and self-confident as possible to avoid questions
and keep from getting on my own nerves.
Margot is very kind and would like me to confide in her, but I can't tell her
everything. She takes me too seriously, far too seriously, and spends a lot of time
thinking about her loony sister, looking at me closely whenever I open my mouth and
wondering, "Is she acting, or does she really mean it?"
It's because we're always together. I don't want the person I confide in to be around
me all the time. When will I untangle my jumbled thoughts? When will I find inner
peace again?
Yours, Anne
TUESDAY, MARCH 14, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
It might be amusing for you (though not for me) to hear what we're going to eat
today. The cleaning lady is working downstairs, so at the moment I'm seated at the
van Daans' oilcloth-covered table with a handkerchief sprinkled with fragrant prewar
perfume pressed to my nose and mouth. You probably don't have the faintest idea
what I'm talking about, so let me "begin at the begin- ning." The people who supply
us with food coupons have been arrested, so we have just our five black-market ra-
-, tion books-no coupons, no fats and oils. Since Miep and Mr. Kleiman are sick
again, Bep can't manage the shop- ping. The food is wretched, and so are we. As of
tomor- row, we won't have a scrap of fat, butter or margarine. We can't eat fried
potatoes for breakfast (which we've been doing to save on bread), so we're having hot
cereal instead, and because Mrs. van D. thinks we're starving, we bought some
half-and-half. Lunch today consists of mashed potatoes and pickled kale. This
explains the precautionary measure with the handkerchief. You wouldn't believe how
much kale can stink when it's a few years old! The kitchen smells like a mixture of
spoiled plums, rotten eggs and brine. Ugh, just the thought of having to eat that muck
makes me want to throw up! Besides that, our potatoes have contracted such strange
diseases that one out of every two buckets of pommes de terre winds up in the
garbage. We entertain ourselves by trying to figure out which disease they've got, and
we've reached the conclusion that they suffer from cancer, smallpox and measles.
Honestly, being in hiding during the fourth year of the war is no picnic. If only the
whole stinking mess were over!
To tell you the truth, the food wouldn't matter so much to me if life here were more
pleasant in other ways. But that's just it: this tedious existence is starting to make us
all disagreeable. Here are the opinions of the five grown-ups on the present situation
(children aren't allowed to have opinions, and for once I'm sticking to the rules):
Mrs. van Daan: "I'd stopped wanting to be queen of the kitchen long ago. But sitting
around doing nothing was boring, so I went back to cooking. Still, I can't help
complaining: it's impossible to cook without oil, and all those disgusting smells make
me sick to my stomach. Besides, what do I get in return for my efforts? Ingratitude
and rude remarks. I'm always the black sheep; I get blamed for everything. What's
more, it's my opinion that the war is making very little progress. The Germans will
win in the end. I'm terrified that we're going to starve, and when I'm in a bad mood, I
snap at everyone who comes near."
Mr. van Daan: "I just smoke and smoke and smoke. Then the food, the political
situation and Kerli's moods don't seem so bad. Kerli's a sweetheart. If I don't have
anything to smoke, I get sick, then I need to eat meat, life becomes unbearable,
nothing's good enough, and there's bound to be a flaming row. My Kerli's an idiot."
Mrs. Frank: "Food's not very important, but I'd love a slice of rye bread right now,
because I'm so hungry. If I were Mrs. van Daan, I'd have put a stop to Mr. van
Daan's smoking long ago. But I desperately need a cigarette now, because my head's
in such a whirl. The van Daans are horrible people; the English may make a lot of
mistakes, but the war is progressing. I should keep my mouth shut and be grateful I'm
not in Poland."
Mr. Frank: "Everything's fine, I don't need a thing. Stay calm, we've got plenty of
time. Just give me my potatoes, and I'll be quiet. Better set aside some of my rations
for Bep. The political situation is improving, I'm extremely optimistic."
Mr. Dussel: "I must complete the task I've set for myself, everything must be finished
on time. The political situation is looking 'gut,' it's 'eempossible' for us to get caught.
Me, me, me . . . ."
Yours, Anne
THURSDAY, MARCH 16, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Whew! Released from the gloom and doom for a few moments! All I've been hearing
today is: "If this and that happens, we're in trouble, and if so-and-so gets sick, we'll
be left to fend for ourselves, and if . . ."
Well, you know the rest, or at any rate I assume you're famthar enough with the
residents of the Annex to guess what they'd be talking about.
The reason for all the "ifs" is that Mr. Kugler has been called up for a six-day work
detail, Bep is down with a bad cold and will probably have to stay home tomorrow,
Miep hasn't gotten over her flu, and Mr. Kleiman's stom- ach bled so much he lost
consciousness. What a tale of woe!
We think Mr. Kugler should go directly to a reliable doctor for a medical certificate of
ill health, which he can present to the City Hall in Hilversum. The warehouse --
employees have been given a day off tomorrow, so Bep will be alone in the office. If
(there's another "if') Bep has to stay home, the door will remain locked and we'll have
to be as quiet as mice so the Keg Company won't hear us. At one o'clock Jan will
come for half an hour to check on us poor forsaken souls, like a zookeeper.
This afternoon, for the first time in ages, Jan gave us some news of the outside
world. You should have seen us gathered around him; it looked exactly like a print:
"At Grandmother's Knee."
He regaled his grateful audience with talk of-what else?-food. Mrs. P., a friend of
Miep's, has been cooking his meals. The day before yesterday Jan ate carrots with
green peas, yesterday he had the leftovers, today she's cooking marrowfat peas, and
tomorrow she's plan- ning to mash the remaining carrots with potatoes.
We asked about Miep's doctor.
"Doctor?" said Jan. "What doctor? I called him this morning and got his secretary on
the line. I asked for a flu prescription and was told I could come pick it up tomorrow morning between eight and nine. If you've got a particularly bad case of flu, the
doctor himself comes to the phone and says, 'Stick out your tongue and say "Aah."
Oh, I can hear it, your throat's infected. I'll write out a prescription and you can bring
it to the phar- macy. Good day.' And that's that. Easy job he's got, diagnosis by
phone. But I shouldn't blame the doctors." After all, a person has only two hands, and
these days there're too many patients and too few doctors."
Still, we all had a good laugh at Jan's phone call. I can just imagine what a doctor's
waiting room looks like these days. Doctors no longer turn up their noses at the
poorer patients, but at those with minor illnesses. "Hey, what are you doing here?"
they think. "Go to the end of the line; real patients have priority!"
Yours, Anne
THURSDAY, MARCH 16, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
The weather is gorgeous, indescribably beautiful; I'll be going up to the attic in a
moment.
I now know why I'm so much more restless than Peter. He has his own room, where
he can work, dream, think and sleep. I'm constantly being chased from one corner to
another. I'm never alone in the room I share with Dussel, though I long to be so
much. That's another reason I take refuge in the attic. When I'm there, or with you, I
can be myself, at least for a little while. Still, I don't want to moan and groan. On the
contrary, I want to be brave!
Thank goodness the others notice nothing of my innermost feelings, except that every
day I'm growing cooler and more contemptuous of Mother, less affection- ate to
Father and less willing to share a single thought with Margot; I'm closed up tighter
than a drum. Above all, I have to maintain my air of confidence. No one must know
that my heart and mind are constantly at war with each other. Up to now reason has
always won the battle, but will my emotions get the upper hand? Sometimes I fear
they will, but more often I actually hope they do!
Oh, it's so terribly hard not to talk to Peter about these things, but I know I have to
let him begin; it's so hard to act during the daytime as if everything I've said and
done in my dreams had never taken place! Kitty, Anne is crazy, but then these are
crazy times and even crazier circumstances.
The nicest part is being able to write down all my thoughts and feelings; otherwise,
I'd absolutely suffocate. I wonder what Peter thinks about all these things? I keep
thinking I'll be able to talk to him about them one day. He must have guessed
something about the inner me, since he couldn't possibly love the outer Anne he's
known so far! How could someone like Peter, who loves peace and quiet, possibly
stand my bustle and noise? Will he be the first and only person to see what's beneath
my granite mask? Will it take him long? Isn't there some old saying about love being
akin to pity? Isn't that what's happening here as well? Because I often pity him as
much as I do myself!
I honestly don't know how to begin, I really don't, so how can I expect Peter to when
talking is so much harder for him? If only I could write to him, then at least he'd
know what I was trying to say, since it's so hard to say it out loud!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
FRIDAY, MARCH 17, 1944
My dearest darling,
Everything turned out all right after all; Bep just had a sore throat, not the flu, and
Mr. Kugler got a medical certificate to excuse him from the work detail. The entire
Annex breathed a huge sigh of relief. Everything's fine here! Except that Margot and I
are rather tired of our parents.
Don't get me wrong. I still love Father as much as ever and Margot loves both Father
and Mother, but when you're as old as we are, you want to make a few decisions for
yourself, get out from under their thumb. Whenever I go upstairs, they ask what I'm
going to do, they won't let me salt my food, Mother asks me every evening at
eight-fifteen if it isn't time for me to change into my nighty, I and they have to
approve every book I read. I must admit, they're not at all strict about that and let
me read nearly everything, but Margot and I are sick and tired of having to listen to
their comments and questions all day long.
There's something else that displeases them: I no longer feel like giving them little
kisses morning, noon and night. All those cute nicknames seem so affected, and
Father's fondness for talking about farting and going to the bathroom is disgusting. In
short, I'd like nothing better than to do without their company for a while, and they
don't understand that. Not that Margot and I have ever said any of this to them. What
would be the point? They wouldn't understand anyway.
Margot said last night, "What really bothers me is that if you happen to put your head
in your hands and sigh once or twice, they immediately ask whether you have a
headache or don't feel well."
For both of us, it's been quite a blow to suddenly realize that very little remains of
the close and harmoni- ous family we used to have at home! This is mostly because
everything's out of kilter here. By that I mean that we're treated like children when it
comes to external matters, while, inwardly, we're much older than other girls our age.
Even though I'm only fourteen, I know what I want, I know who's right and who's
wrong, I have my own opinions, ideas and principles, and though it may sound odd
coming from a teenager, I feel I'm more of a person than a child -- I feel I'm
completely independent of others. I know I'm better at debating or carrying on a
discussion than Mother, I know I'm more objective, I don't exaggerate as much, I'm
much tidier and better with my hands, and because of that I feel (this may make you
laugh) that I'm superior to her in many ways. To love someone, I have to admire and
respect the person, but I feel neither respect nor admiration for Mother!
Everything would be all right if only I had Peter, since I admire him in many ways.
He's so decent and clever!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
SATURDAY, MARCH 18, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
I've told you more about myself and my feelings than I've ever told a living soul, so
why shouldn't that include sex?
Parents, and people in general, are very peculiar when it comes to sex. Instead of
telling their sons and daughters everything at the age of twelve, they send the
children out of the room the moment the subject arises and leave them to find out
everything on their own. Later on, when parents notice that their children have,
somehow, come by their information, they assume they know more (or less) than they
actually do. So why don't they try to make amends by asking them what's what?
A major stumbling block for the adults -- though in my opinion it's no more than a
pebble -- is that they're afraid their children will no longer look upon marriage as
sacred and pure once they realize that, in most cases, this purity is a lot of nonsense.
As far as I'm concerned, it's not wrong for a man to bring a little experience to a
marriage. After all, it has nothing to do with the marriage itself, does it?
Soon after I turned eleven, they told me about menstruation. But even then, I had no
idea where the blood came from or what it was for. When I was twelve and a half, I
learned some more from Jacque, who wasn't as ignorant as I was. My own intuition
told me what a man and a woman do when they're together; it seemed like a crazy
idea at first, but when Jacque confirmed it, I was proud of myself for having figured it
out!
It was also Jacque who told me that children didn't come out of their mother's
tummies. As she put it, "Where the ingredients go in is where the finished product
comes out!" Jacque and I found out about the hymen, and quite a few other details,
from a book on sex education. I also knew that you could keep from having children,
but how that worked inside your body remained a mystery. When I came here, Father
told me about prostitutes, etc., but all in all there are still unanswered questions.
If mothers don't tell their children everything, they hear it in bits and pieces, and that
can't be right.
Even though it's Saturday, I'm not bored! That's because I've been up in the attic with
Peter. I sat there dreaming with my eyes closed, and it was wonderful.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
SUNDAY, MARCH 19, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Yesterday was a very important day for me. After lunch everything was as usual. At
five I put on the potatoes, and Mother gave me some blood sausage to take to Peter.
I didn't want to at first, but I finally went. He wouldn't accept the sausage, and I had
the dreadful feel- ing it was still because of that argument we'd had about distrust.
Suddenly I couldn't bear it a moment longer and my eyes filled with tears. Without
another word, I re- turned the platter to Mother and went to the bathroom to have a
good cry. Afterward I decided to talk things out with Peter. Before dinner the four of
us were helping him with a crossword puzzle, so I couldn't say anything. But as we
were sitting down to eat, I whispered to him, "Are you going to practice your
shorthand tonight, Peter?"
"No," was his reply.
"I'd like to talk to you later on."
He agreed.
After the dishes were done, I went to his room and asked if he'd refused the sausage
because of our last quar- rel. Luckily, that wasn't the reason; he just thought it was
bad manners to seem so eager. It had been very hot downstairs and my face was as
red as a lobster. So after taking down some water for Margot, I went back up to get
a little fresh air. For the sake of appearances, I first went and stood beside the van
Daans' window before going to Peter's room. He was standing on the left side of the
open window, so I went over to the right side. It's much easier to talk next to an
open window in semidarkness than in broad daylight, and I think Peter felt the same
way. We told each other so much, so very much, that I can't repeat it all. But it felt
good; it was the most won- derful evening I've ever had in the Annex. I'll give you a
brief description of the various subjects we touched on.
First we talked about the quarrels and how I see them in a very different light these
days, and then about how we've become alienated from our parents. I told Peter about
Mother and Father and Margot and myself. At one point he asked, "You always give
each other a good-night kiss, don't you?"
"One? Dozens of them. You don't, do you?"
"No, I've never really kissed anyone."
"Not even on your birthday?"
"Yeah, on my birthday I have."
We talked about how neither of us really trusts our parents, and how his parents love
each other a great deal and wish he'd confide in them, but that he doesn't want to.
How I cry my heart out in bed and he goes up to the loft and swears. How Margot
and I have only recently gotten to know each other and yet still tell each other very
little, since we're always together. We talked about every imaginable thing, about
trust, feelings and ourselves. Oh, Kitty, he was just as I thought he would be.
Then we talked about the year 1942, and how different we were back then; we don't
even recognize ourselves from that period. How we couldn't stand each other at first.
He'd thought I was a noisy pest, and I'd quickly concluded that he was nothing special.
I didn't understand why he didn't flirt with me, but now I'm glad. He also mentioned
how he often used to retreat to his room. I said that my noise and exuberance and his
silence were two sides of the same coin, and that I also liked peace and quiet but
don't have anything for myself alone, except my diary, and that everyone would rather
see the back of me, starting with Mr. Dussel, and that I don't always want to sit with
my parents. We discussed how glad he is that my parents have children and how glad
I am that he's here.
How I now understand his need to withdraw and his relationship to his parents, and
how much I'd like to help him when they argue.
"But you're always a help to me!" he said.
"How?" I asked, greatly surprised.
"By being cheerful."
That was the nicest thing he said all evening. He also told me that he didn't mind my
coming to his room the way he used to; in fact, he liked it. I also told him that all of
Father's and Mother's pet names were meaningless, that a kiss here and there didn't
automatically lead to trust. We also talked about doing things your own way, the diary,
loneliness, the difference between everyone's inner and outer selves, my mask, etc.
It was wonderful. He must have come to love me as a friend, and, for the time being,
that's enough. I'm so grateful and happy, I can't find the words. I must apolo- gize,
Kitty, since my style is not up to my usual standard today. I've just written whatever
came into my head!
I have the feeling that Peter and I share a secret. Whenever he looks at me with
those eyes, with that smile and that wink, it's as if a light goes on inside me. I hope
things will stay like this and that we'll have many, many more happy hours together.
Your grateful and happy Anne
MONDAY, MARCH 20, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
This morning Peter asked me if I'd come again one evening. He swore I wouldn't be
disturbing him, and said that where there was room for one, there was room for two.
I said I couldn't see him every evening, since my parents didn't think it was a good
idea, but he thought I shouldn't let that bother me. So I told him I'd like to come
some Saturday evening and also asked him if he'd let me know when you could see
the moon.
"Sure," he said, "maybe we can go downstairs and look at the moon from there." I
agreed; I'm not really so scared of burglars.
In the meantime, a shadow has fallen on my happiness. For a long time I've had the
feeling that Margot likes Peter. Just how much I don't know, but the whole situation is
very unpleasant. Now every time I go see Peter I'm hurting her, without meaning to.
The funny thing is that she hardly lets it show. I know I'd be insanely jealous, but
Margot just says I shouldn't feel sorry for her.
"I think it's so awful that you've become the odd one out," I added.
"I'm used to that," she replied, somewhat bitterly.
I don't dare tell Peter. Maybe later on, but he and I need to discuss so many other
things first.
Mother slapped me last night, which I deserved. I mustn't carry my indifference and
contempt for her too far. In spite of everything, I should try once again to be friendly
and keep my remarks to myself!
Even Pim isn't as nice as he used to be. He's been trying not to treat me like a child,
but now he's much too cold. We'll just have to see what comes of it! He's warned me
that if I don't do my algebra, I won't get any tutoring after the war. I could simply
wait and see what happens, but I'd like to start again, provided I get a new book.
That's enough for now. I do nothing but gaze at Peter, and I'm filled to overflowing!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
Evidence of Margot's goodness. I received this today, March 20, 1944:
Anne, yesterday when I said I wasn't jeal- ous of you, I wasn't being entirely honest.
The situation is this: I'm not jealous of either you or Peter. I'm just sorry I haven't
found anyone willi whom to share my thoughts and feelings, and I'm not likely to in
the near future. But that's why I wish, from the bottom of my heart, that you will
both be able to place your trust in each other. You're already missing out on so much
here, things other people take for granted.
On the other hand, I'm certain I'd never have gotten as far with Peter, because I think
I'd need to feel very close to a person before I could share my thoughts. I'd want to
have the feeling that he understood me through and through, even if I didn't say much.
For this reason it would have to be someone I felt was intellectually superior to me,
and that isn't the case with Peter. But I can imagine your feeling close to him.
So there's no need for you to reproach yourself because you think you' te taking
something I was entitled to; nothing could be further from the truth. You and Peter
have everything to gain by your friendship.
My answer:
Dearest Margot,
Your letter was extremely kind, but I still don't feel completely happy about the
situation, and I don't think I ever will.
At the moment, Peter and I don't trust each other as much as you seem to think. It's
just that when you're standing beside an open window at twthght, you can say more to
each other than in bright sunshine. It's also easier to whisper your feelings than to
shout them from the rooftops. I think you've begun to feel a kind of sisterly affection
for Peter and would like to help him, just as much as I would. Perhaps you'll be able
to do that someday, though that's not the kind of trust we have in mind. I believe that
trust has to corne from both sides; I also think that's the reason why Father and I
have never really grown so close. But let's not talk about it anymore. If there's
anything you still want to discuss, please write, because it's easier for me to say what
I mean as on paper than face-to-face. You know how le much I admire you, and only
hope that some of your goodness and Father's goodness will rub off on me, because,
in that sense, you two are a lot alike.
Yours, Anne
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 22,1944
Dearest Kitty,
I received this letter last night from Margot:
Dear Anne,
After your letter of yesterday I have the unpleasant feeling that your conscience
bothers you whenever you go to Peter's to work or talk; there's really no reason for
that. In my heart, I know there's someone who deserves t my trust (as I do his), and
I wouldn't be able to tolerate Peter in his place.
However, as you wrote, I do think of Peter as a kind of brother. . . a younger
brother; we've been sending out feelers, and a brotherly and sisterly affection mayor
may not develop at some later date, but it's certainly not reached that stage yet. So
there's no need for you to feel sorry for me. Now that you've found companionship,
enjoy it as much as you can.
In the meantime, things are getting more and more wonderful here. I think, Kitty, that
true love may be developing in the Annex. All those jokes about marrying Peter if we
stayed here long enough weren't so silly after all. Not that I'm thinking of marrying
him, mind you. I don't even know what he'll be like when he grows up. Or if we'll
even love each other enough to get married.
I'm sure now that Peter loves me too; I just don't know in what way. I can't figure
out if he wants only a good friend, or if he's attracted to me as a girl or as a sister.
When he said I always helped him when his parents were arguing, I was tremendously
happy; it was one step toward making me believe in his friendship. I asked him
yesterday what he'd do if there were a dozen Annes who kept popping in to see him.
His answer was: "If they were all like you, it wouldn't be so bad." He's extremely
hospitable, and I think he really likes to see me. Mean- while, he's been working hard
at learning French, even studying in bed until ten-fifteen.
Oh, when I think back to Saturday night, to our words, our voices, I feel satisfied with
myself for the very first time; what I mean is, I'd still say the same and wouldn't
want to change a thing, the way I usually do. He's so handsome, whether he's smthng
or just sitting still. He's so sweet and good and beautiful. I think what surprised him
most about me was when he discovered that I'm not at all the superficial, worldly
Anne I appear to be, but a dreamer, like he is, with just as many troubles!
Last night after the dinner dishes, I waited for him to ask me to stay upstairs. But
nothing happened; I went away. He came downstairs to tell Dussel it was time to
listen to the radio and hung around the bathroom for a while, but when Dussel took
too long, he went back upstairs. He paced up and down his room and went to bed
early.
The entire evening I was so restless I kept going to the bathroom to splash cold
water on my face. I read a bit, daydreamed some more, looked at the clock and
waited, waited, waited, all the while listening to his foot- steps. I went to bed early,
exhausted.
Tonight I have to take a bath, and tomorrow?
Tomorrow's so far away!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
My answer:
Dearest Margot,
I think the best thing is simply to wait and see what happens. It can't be much longer
before Peter and I will have to decide whether to go back to the way we were or do
some- thing else. I don't know how it'll turn out; I can't see any farther than the end
of my nose.
But I'm certain of one thing: if Peter and I do become friends, I'm going to tell him
you're also very fond of him and are prepared to help him if he needs you. You
wouldn't want me to, I'm sure, but I don't care; I don't know what Peter thinks of
you, but I'll ask him when the time comes. It's certainly nothing bad -- on the
contrary! You're welcome to join us in the attic, or wherever we are. You won't be
disturbing us, because we have an unspoken agreement to talk only in the evenings
when it's dark.
Keep your spirits up! I'm doing my best, though it's not always easy. Your time may
come sooner than you think.
Yours, Anne
THURSDAY, MARCH 23, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Things are more or less back to normal here. Our coupon men have been released
from prison, thank goodness!
Miep's been back since yesterday, but today it was her husband's turn to take to his
bed-chills and fever, the usual flu symptoms. Bep is better, though she still has a
cough, and Mr. Kleiman will have to stay home for a long time.
Yesterday a plane crashed nearby. The crew was able to parachute out in time. It
crashed on top of a school, but luckily there were no children inside. There was a
small fire and a couple of people were killed. As the airmen made their descent, the
Germans sprayed them with bullets. The Amsterdammers who saw it seethed with
rage at such a dastardly deed. We-by which I mean the ladies-were also scared out
of our wits. Brrr, I hate the sound of gunfire.
Now about myself.
I was with Peter yesterday and, somehow, I honestly don't know how, we wound up
talking about sex. I'd made up my mind a long time ago to ask him a few things. He
knows everything; when I said that Margot and I weren't very well informed, he was
amazed. I told him a lot about Margot and me and Mother and Father and said that
lately I didn't dare ask them anything. He offered to enlighten me, and I gratefully
accepted: he described how contraceptives work, and I asked him very boldly how
boys could tell they were grown up. He had to think about that one; he said he'd tell
me tonight. I told him what had happened to Jacque, and said that girls are
defenseless against strong boys. "Well, you don't have to be afraid of me," he said.
When I came back that evening, he told me how it is with boys. Slightly embarrassing,
but still awfully nice to be able to discuss it with him. Neither he nor I had ever
imagined we'd be able to talk so openly to a girl or a boy, respectively, about such
intimate matters. I think I know everything now. He told me a lot about what he
called Prasentivmitteln* [* Should be Praservativmitteln: prophylactics] in German.
That night in the bathroom Margot and I were talking about Bram and Trees, two
friends of hers.
This morning I was in for a nasty surprise: after breakfast Peter beckoned me
upstairs. "That was a dirty trick you played on me," he said. "I heard what you and
Margot were saying in the bathroom last night. I think you just wanted to find out
how much Peter knew and then have a good laugh!"
I was stunned! I did everything I could to talk him out of that outrageous idea; I
could understand how he must have felt, but it just wasn't true!
"Oh no, Peter," I said. "I'd never be so mean. I told you I wouldn't pass on anything
you said to me and I won't. To put on an act like that and then deliberately be so
mean. . . No,Peter, that's not my idea ofa joke.
It wouldn't be fair. I didn't say anything, honest. Won't you believe me?" He assured
me he did, but I think we'll have to talk about it again sometime. I've done nothing all
day but worry about it. Thank goodness he came right out and said what was on his
mind. Imagine if he'd gone around thinking I could be that mean. He's so sweet!
Now I'll have to tell him everything!
Yours, Anne
FRIDAY, MARCH 24, 1944
Dear Kitty,
I often go up to Peter's room after dinner nowadays to breathe in the fresh evening
air. You can get around to meaningful conversations more quickly in the dark than with
the sun tickling your face. It's cozy and snug sitting beside him on a chair and looking
outside. The van Daans and Dussel make the silliest remarks when I disappear into his
room. "Annes zweite Heimat,"* [* Anne's second home] they say, or "Is it proper for
a gentleman to receive young girls in his room at night with the lights out?" Peter has
amazing presence of mind in the face of these so-called witticisms. My mother,
incidentally, is also bursting with curiosity and simply dying to ask what we talk
about, only she's secretly afraid I'd refuse to answer. Peter says the grown-ups are
just jealous because we're young and that we shouldn't take their obnoxious comments
to heart.
Sometimes he comes downstairs to get me, but that's awkward too, because in spite
of all his precautions his face turns bright red and he can hardly get the words out of
his mouth. I'm glad I don't blush; it must be extremely unpleasant.
Besides, it bothers me that Margot has to sit downstairs all by herself, while I'm
upstairs enjoying Peter's company. But what can I do about it? I wouldn't mind it if
she came, but she'd just be the odd one out, sitting there like a lump on a log.
I've had to listen to countless remarks about our sudden friendship. I can't tell you
how often the conversation at meals has been about an Annex wedding, should the war
last another five years. Do we take any notice of this parental chitchat? Hardly, since
it's all so silly. Have my parents forgotten that they were young once? Apparently
they have. At any rate, they laugh at us when we're serious, and they're serious when
we're joking.
I don't know what's going to happen next, or whether we'll run out of things to say.
But if it goes on like this, we'll eventually be able to be together without talking. If
only his parents would stop acting so strangely. It's probably because they don't like
seeing me so often; Peter and I certainly never tell them what we talk about. Imagine
if they knew we were discussing such intimate things.
I'd like to ask Peter whether he knows what girls look like down there. I don't think
boys are as complicated as girls. You can easily see what boys look like in
photographs or pictures of male nudes, but with women it's different. In women, the
genitals, or whatever they're called, are hidden between their legs. Peter has probably
never seen a girl up close. To tell you the truth, neither have I. Boys are a lot easier.
How on earth would I go about describing a girl's parts? I can tell from what he said
that he doesn't know exactly how it all fits together. He was talking about the
"Muttermund," [* cervix], but that's on the inside, where you can't see it. Everything's
pretty well arranged in us women. Until I was eleven or twelve, I didn't realize there
was a second set of labia on the inside, since you couldn't see them. What's even
funnier is that I thought urine came out of the clitoris. I asked Mother one time what
that little bump was, and she said she didn't know. She can really play dumb when
she wants to!
But to get back to the subject. How on earth can you explain what it all looks like
without any models?
Shall I try anyway? Okay, here goes!
When you're standing up, all you see from the front is hair. Between your legs there
are two soft, cushiony things, also covered with hair, which press together when
you're standing, so you can't see what's inside. They separate when you sit down, and
they're very red and quite fleshy on the inside. In the upper part, between the outer
labia, there's a fold of skin that, on second thought, looks like a kind of blister. That's
the clitoris. Then come the inner labia, which are also pressed together in a kind of
crease. When they open up, you can see a fleshy little mound, no bigger than the top
of my thumb. The upper part has a couple of small holes in it, which is where the
urine comes out. The lower part looks as if it were just skin, and yet that's where
the vagina is. You can barely find it, because the folds of skin hide the opening. The
hole's so small I can hardly imagine how a man could get in there, much less how a
baby could come out. It's hard enough trying to get your index finger inside. That's all
there is, and yet it plays such an important role!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
SATURDAY, MARCH 25, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
You never realize how much you've changed until after it's happened. I've changed
quite drastically, everything about me is different: my opinions, ideas, critical outlook.
Inwardly, outwardly, nothing's the same. And, I might safely add, since it's true, I've
changed for the better. I once told you that, after years of being adored, it was hard
for me to adjust to the harsh reality of grown-ups and rebukes. But Father and
Mother are largely to blame for my having to put up with so much. At home they
wanted me to enjoy life, which was fine, but here they shouldn't have encouraged me
to agree with them and only shown me "their" side of all the quarrels and gossip. It
was a long time before I discovered the score was fifty-fifty. I now know that many
blunders have been committed here, by young and old alike. Father and Mother's
biggest mistake in dealing with the van Daans is that they're never candid and friendly
(admittedly, the friendliness might have to be feigned). Above all, I want to keep the
peace, and to neither quarrel nor gossip. With Father and Margot that's not difficult,
but it is with Mother, which is why I'm glad she gives me an occasional rap on the
knuckles. You can win Mr. van Daan to your side by agreeing with him, listening
quietly, not saying much and most of all . . . responding to his teasing and his corny
jokes with a joke of your own. Mrs. van D. can be won over by talking openly to her
and admitting when you're wrong. She also frankly admits her faults, of which she has
many. I know all too well that she doesn't think as badly of me as she did in the
beginning. And that's simply because I'm honest and tell people right to their faces
what I think, even when it's not very flattering. I want to be honest; I think it gets
you further and also makes you feel better about yourself.
Yesterday Mrs. van D. was talking about the rice we gave Mr. Kleiman. "All we do is
give, give, give. But at a certain point I think that enough is enough. If he'd only take
the trouble, Mr. Kleiman could scrounge up his own rice. Why should we give away all
our supplies? We need them just as badly."
"No, Mrs. van Daan," I replied. "I don't agree with you. Mr. Kleiman may very well be
able to get hold of a little rice, but he doesn't like having to worry about it. It's not
our place to criticize the people who are helping us. We should give them whatever
they need if we can possibly spare it. One less plate of rice a week won't make that
much difference; we can always eat beans."
Mrs. van D. didn't see it my way, but she added that, even though she disagreed, she
was willing to back down, and that was an entirely different matter.
Well, I've said enough. Sometimes I know what my place is and sometimes I have my
doubts, but I'll eventually get where I want to be! I know I will! Especially now that I
have help, since Peter helps me through many a rough patch and rainy day!
I honestly don't know how much he loves me and whether we'll ever get as far as a
kiss; in any case, I don't want to force the issue! I told Father I often go see Peter
and asked if he approved, and of course he did!
It's much easier now to tell Peter things I'd nor- mally keep to myself; for example,
I told him I want to write later on, and if I can't be a writer, to write in addition to
my work.
I don't have much in the way of money or worldly possessions, I'm not beautiful,
intelligent or clever, but I'm happy, and I intend to stay that way! I was born happy, I
love people, I have a trusting nature, and I'd like everyone else to be happy too.
Your devoted friend, Anne M. Frank
An empty day, though clear and bright,
Is just as dark as any night.
(I wrote this a few weeks ago and it no longer holds true, but I included it because
my poems are so few and far between.)
MONDAY, MARCH 27, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
At least one long chapter on our life in hiding should be about politics, but I've been
avoiding the subject, since it interests me so little. Today, however, I'll devote an
entire letter to politics.
Of course, there are many different opinions on this topic, and it's not surprising to
hear it frequently discussed in times of war, but. . . arguing so much about politics is
just plain stupid! Let them laugh, swear, make bets, grumble and do whatever they
want as long as they stew in their own juice. But don't let them argue, since that only
makes things worse. The people who come from outside bring us a lot of news that
later proves to be untrue; however, up to now our radio has never lied. Jan, Miep, Mr.
Kleiman, Bep and Mr. Kugler go up and down in their political moods, though Jan least
of all.
Here in the Annex the mood never varies. The end- less debates over the invasion,
air raids, speeches, etc., etc., are accompanied by countless exclamations such as
"Eempossible!, Urn Gottes Willen* [* Oh, for heaven's sake]. If they're just getting
started now, how long is it going to last!, It's going splendidly, But, great!"
Optimists and pessimists -- not to mention the realists -- air their opinions with
unflagging energy, and as with everything else, they're all certain that they have a
monopoly on the truth. It annoys a certain lady that her spouse has such supreme
faith in the British, and a certain husband attacks his wife because of her teasing and
dispar- aging remarks about his beloved nation!
And so it goes from early in the morning to late at night; the funny part is that they
never get tired of it. I've discovered a trick, and the effect is overwhelming, just like
pricking someone with a pin and watching them jump. Here's how it works: I start
talking about politics.
All it takes is a single question, a word or a sentence, and before you know it, the
entire family is involved!
As if the German "Wehrmacht News" and the English BBC weren't enough, they've
now added special air-raid announcements. In a word, splendid. But the other side of
the coin is that the British Air Force is operating around the clock. Not unlike the
German propaganda machine, which is cranking out lies twenty-four hours a day!
So the radio is switched on every morning at eight (if not earlier) and is listened to
every hour until nine, ten or even eleven at night. This is the best evidence yet that
the adults have infinite patience, but also that their brains have turned to mush (some
of them, I mean, since I wouldn't want to insult anyone). One broadcast, two at the
most, should be enough to last the entire day. But no, those old nincompoops. . .
never mind, I've already said it all! "Music While You Work," the Dutch broadcast
from England, Frank Phillips or Queen Wilhelmina, they each get a turn and fInd a
willing listener. If the adults aren't eating or sleeping, they're clustered around the
radio talking about eating, sleeping and politics. Whew! It's getting to be a bore, and
it's all I can do to keep from turning into a dreary old crone myself! Though with all
the old folks around me, that might not be such a bad idea!
Here's a shining example, a speech made by our beloved Winston Churchill.
Nine o'clock, Sunday evening. The teapot, under its cozy, is on the table, and the
guests enter the room.
Dussel sits to the left of the radio, Mr. van D. in front of it and Peter to the side.
Mother is next to Mr. van D., willi Mrs. van D. behind them. Margot and I are sitting
in the last row and Pim at the table. I realize this isn't a very clear description of our
seating arrangements, but it doesn't matter. The men smoke, Peter's eyes close from
the strain of listening, Mama is dressed in her long, dark negligee, Mrs. van D. is
trembling because of the planes, which take no notice of the speech but fly blithely on
toward Essen, Father is slurping his tea, and Margot and I are united in a sisterly way
by the sleeping Mouschi, who has taken possession of both our knees. Margot's hair is
in curlers and my nightgown is too small, too tight and too short. It all looks so
intimate, cozy and peaceful, and for once it really is. Yet I await the end of the
speech willi dread. They're impatient, straining at the leash to start another argument!
Pst, pst, like a cat luring a mouse from its hole, they goad each other into quarrels
and dissent.
Yours, Anne
TUESDAY, MARCH 28, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
As much as I'd like to write more on politics, I have lots of other news to report
today. First, Mother has virtually forbidden me to go up to Peter's, since, according to
her, Mrs. van Daan is jealous. Second, Peter's invited Margot to join us upstairs.
Whether he really means it or is just saying it out of politeness, I don't know. Third,
I asked Father if he thought I should take any notice of Mrs. van Daan's jealousy and
he said I didn't have to.
What should I do now? Mother's angry, doesn't want me going upstairs, wants me to
go back to doing my homework in the room I share willi Dussel. She may be jealous
herself. Father doesn't begrudge us those few hours and thinks it's nice we get along
so well. Margot likes Peter too, but feels that three people can't talk about the same
things as two.
Furthermore, Mother thinks Peter's in love with me. To tell you the truth, I wish he
were. Then we'd be even, and it'd be a lot easier to get to know each other. She also
claims he's always looking at me. Well, I suppose we do give each other the
occasional wink. But I can't help it if he keeps admiring my dimples, can I?
I'm in a very difficult position. Mother's against me and I'm against her. Father turns a
blind eye to the silent struggle between Mother and me. Mother is sad, because she
still loves me, but I'm not at all unhappy, because she no longer means anything to
me.
As for Peter. . . I don't want to give him up. He's so sweet and I admire him so
much. He and I could have a really beautiful relationship, so why are the old folks
poking their noses into our business again? Fortu- nately, I'm used to hiding my
feelings, so I manage not to show how crazy I am about him. Is he ever going to say
anything? Am I ever going to feel his cheek against mine, the way I felt Petel's cheek
in my dream? Oh, Peter and
Petel, you're one and the same! They don't understand us; they'd never understand
that we're content just to sit beside each other and not say a word. They have no
idea of what draws us together! Oh, when will we overcome all these difficulties? And
yet it's good that we have to surmount them, since it makes the end that much more
beautiful. When he lays his head on his arms and closes his eyes, he's still a child;
when he plays with Mouschi or talks about her, he's loving; when he carries the
potatoes or other heavy loads, he's strong; when he goes to watch the gunfire or
walks through the dark house to look for burglars, he's brave; and when he's so
awkward and clumsy, he's hopelessly endearing. It's much nicer when he explains
something to me than when I have to teach him. I wish he were superior to me in
nearly every way!
What do we care about our two mothers? Oh, if only he'd say something.
Father always says I'm conceited, but I'm not, I'm merely vain! I haven't had many
people tell me I was pretty, except for a boy at school who said I looked so cute
when I smiled. Yesterday Peter paid me a true com- pliment, and just for fun I'll give
you a rough idea of our conversation.
Peter often says, "Smile!" I thought it was strange, so yesterday I asked him, "Why
do you always want me to smile?"
"Because you get dimples in your cheeks. How do you do that?"
"I was born with them. There's also one in my chin. It's the only mark of beauty I
possess."
"No, no, that's not true!"
"Yes it is. I know I'm not beautiful. I never have been and I never will be!"
"I don't agree. I think you're pretty."
"I am not."
"I say you are, and you'll have to take my word for it." So of course I then said the
same about him.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 29, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Mr. Bolkestein, the Cabinet Minister, speaking on the Dutch broadcast from London,
said that after the war a collection would be made of diaries and letters dealing with
the war. Of course, everyone pounced on my diary. Just imagine how interesting it
would be if I were to publish a novel about the Secret Annex. The title alone would
make people think it was a detective story.
Seriously, though, ten years after the war people would find it very amusing to read
how we lived, what we ate and what we talked about as Jews in hiding. Although I
tell you a great deal about our lives, you still know very little about us. How
frightened the women are during air raids; last Sunday, for instance, when 350 British
planes dropped 550 tons of bombs on IJmuiden, so that the houses trembled like
blades of grass in the wind. Or how many epidemics are raging here.
You know nothing of these matters, and it would take me all day to describe
everything down to the last detail. People have to stand in line to buy vegetables and
all kinds of goods; doctors can't visit their patients, since their cars and bikes are
stolen the moment they turn their backs; burglaries and thefts are so common that you
ask yourself what's suddenly gotten into the Dutch to make them so light-fingered.
Little children, eight- and eleven- year-olds, smash the windows of people's homes
and steal whatever they can lay their hands on. People don't dare leave the house for
even five minutes, since they're liable to come back and find all their belongings gone.
Every day the newspapers are filled with reward notices for the return of stolen
typewriters, Persian rugs, electric clocks, fabrics, etc. The electric clocks on street
corners are dismantled, public phones are stripped down to the last wire.
Morale among the Dutch can't be good. Everyone's hungry; except for the ersatz
coffee, a week's food ration doesn't last two days. The invasion's long in coming, the
men are being shipped off to Germany, the children are sick or undernourished,
everyone's wearing worn-out clothes and run-down shoes. A new sole costs 7.50
guil- ders on the black market. Besides, few shoemakers will do repairs, or if they
do, you have to wait four months for your shoes, which might very well have
disappeared in the meantime.
One good thing has come out of this: as the food gets worse and the decrees more
severe, the acts of sabo- tage against the authorities are increasing. The ration board,
the police, the officials-they're all either helping their fellow citizens or denouncing
them and sending them off to prison. Fortunately, only a small percentage of Dutch
people are on the wrong side.
Yours, Anne
FRIDAY, MARCH 31, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Just imagine, it's still fairly cold, and yet most people have been without coal for
nearly a month. Sounds awful, doesn't it? There's a general mood of optimism about
the Russian front, because that's going great guns! I don't often write about the
political situation, but I must tell you where the Russians are at the moment. They've
reached the Polish border and the Prut River in Romania. They're close to Odessa, and
they've surrounded Ternopol. Every night we're expecting an extra communique from
Stalin.
They're firing off so many salutes in Moscow, the city must be rumbling and shaking
all day long. Whether they like to pretend the fighting's nearby or they simply don't
have any other way to express their joy, I don't know!
Hungary has been occupied by German troops.
There are still a million Jews living there; they too are doomed.
Nothing special is happening here. Today is Mr. van Daan's birthday. He received two
packets of tobacco, one serving of coffee, which his wife had managed to save, lemon
punch from Mr. Kugler, sardines from Miep, eau de cologne from us, lilacs, tulips and,
last but not least, a cake with raspberry filling, slightly gluey because of the poor
quality of the flour and the lack of butter, but deli- cious anyway.
All that talk about Peter and me has died down a bit. He's coming to pick me up
tonight. Pretty nice of him, don't you think, since he hates doing it! We're very good
friends. We spend a lot of time together and talk about every imaginable subject. It's
so nice not having to hold back when we come to a delicate topic, the way I would
with other boys. For example, we were talking about blood and somehow the
conversation turned to menstruation, etc. He thinks we women are quite tough to be
able to withstand the loss of blood, and that I am too. I wonder why?
My life here has gotten better, much better. God has not forsaken me, and He never
will.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
SATURDAY, APRIL 1, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
And yet everything is still so difficult. You do know what I mean, don't you? I long so
much for him to kiss me, but that kiss is taking its own sweet time. Does he still
think of me as a friend? Don't I mean anything more?
You and I both know that I'm strong, that I can carry most burdens alone. I've never
been used to sharing my worries with anyone, and I've never clung to a mother, but
I'd love to lay my head on his shoulder and just sit there quietly.
I can't, I simply can't forget that dream of Peter's cheek, when everything was so
good! Does he have the same longing? Is he just too shy to say he loves me? Why
does he want me near him so much? Oh, why doesn't he say something?
I've got to stop, I've got to be calm. I'll try to be strong again, and if I'm patient, the
rest will follow. But -- and this is the worst part -- I seem to be chasing him. I'm
always the one who has to go upstairs; he never comes to me. But that's because of
the rooms, and he understands why I object. Oh, I'm sure he understands more than I
think .
Yours, Anne M. Frank
MONDAY, APRIL 3, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
Contrary to my usual practice, I'm going to write you a detailed description of the
food situation, since it's become a matter of some difficulty and importance, not only
here in the Annex, but in all of Holland, all of Europe and even beyond.
In the twenty-one months we've lived here, we've been through a good many "food
cycles" -- you'll understand what that means in a moment. A "food cycle" is a period
in which we have only one particular dish or type of vegetable to eat. For a long time
we ate nothing but endive. Endive with sand, endive without sand, endive with mashed
potatoes, endive-and-mashed potato casserole. Then it was spinach, followed by
kohlrabi, salsify, cucumbers, tomatoes, sauerkraut, etc., etc.
It's not much fun when you have to eat, say, sauer- kraut every day for lunch and
dinner, but when you're hungry enough, you do a lot of things. Now, however, we're
going through the most delightful period so far, because there are no vegetables at all.
Our weekly lunch menu consists of brown beans, split-pea soup, potatoes with
dumplings, potato kugel and, by the grace of God, turnip greens or rotten carrots, and
then it's back to brown beans. Because of the bread shortage, we eat potatoes at
every meal, starting with breakfast, but then we fry them a little. To make soup we
use brown beans, navy beans, potatoes, packages of vege- table soup, packages of
chicken soup and packages of bean soup. There are brown beans in everything,
including the bread. For dinner we always have potatoes with imitation gravy and --
thank goodness we've still got it -- beet salad. I must tell you about the dumplings.
We make them with government-issue flour, water and yeast. They're so gluey and
tough that it feels as if you had rocks in your stomach, but oh well!
The high point is our weekly slice of liverwurst, and the jam on our unbuttered bread.
But we're still alive, and much of the time it still tastes good too!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 5, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
For a long time now I didn't know why I was bothering to do any schoolwork. The
end of the war still seemed so far away, so unreal, like a fairy tale. If the war isn't
over by September, I won't go back to school, since I don't want to be two years
behind.
Peter filled my days, nothing but Peter, dreams and thoughts until Saturday night,
when I felt so utterly miserable; oh, it was awful. I held back my tears when I was
with Peter, laughed uproariously with the van Daans as we drank lemon punch and was
cheerful and excited, but the minute I was alone I knew I was going to cry my eyes
out. I slid to the floor in my nightgown and began by saying my prayers, very
fervently. Then I drew my knees to my chest, lay my head on my arms and cried, all
huddled up on the bare floor. A loud sob brought me back down to earth, and I choked
back my tears, since I didn't want anyone next door to hear me. Then I tried to pull
myself together, saying over and over, "I must, I must, I must. . . " Stiff from sitting
in such an unusual position, I fell back against the side of the bed and kept up my
struggle until just before ten-thirty, when I climbed back into bed. It was over!
And now it's really over. I finally realized that I must do my schoolwork to keep from
being ignorant, to get on in life, to become a journalist, because that's what I want! I
know I can write. A few of my stories are good, my descriptions of the Secret Annex
are humorous, much of my diary is vivid and alive, but. . . it remains to be seen
whether I really have talent.
"Eva's Dream" is my best fairy tale, and the odd thing is that I don't have the faintest
idea where it came from. Parts of "Cady's Life" are also good, but as a whole it's
nothing special. I'm my best and harshest critic. I know what's good and what isn't.
Unless you write yourself, you can't know how wonderful it is; I always used to
bemoan the fact that I couldn't draw, but now I'm overjoyed that at least I can write.
And if I don't have the talent to write books or newspaper articles, I can always write
for myself. But I want to achieve more than that. I can't imagine having to live like
Mother, Mrs. van Daan and all the women who go about their work and are then
forgotten. I need to have something besides a husband and children to devote myself
to! I don't want to have lived in vain like most people. I want to be useful or bring
enjoyment to all people, even those I've never met. I want to go on living even after
my death! And that's why I'm so grateful to God for having given me this gift, which
I can use to develop myself and to express all that's inside me!
When I write I can shake off all my cares. My sor- row disappears, my spirits are
revived! But, and that's a big question, will I ever be able to write something great,
will I ever become a journalist or a writer?
I hope so, oh, I hope so very much, because writing allows me to record everything,
all my thoughts, ideals and fantasies.
I haven't worked on "Cady's Life" for ages. In my mind I've worked out exactly what
happens next, but the story doesn't seem to be coming along very well. I might never
finish it, and it'll wind up in the wastepaper basket or the stove. That's a horrible
thought, but then I say to myself, "At the age of fourteen and with so little
experience, you can't write about philosophy."
So onward and upward, with renewed spirits. It'll all work out, because I'm determined
to write!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
THURSDAY, APRIL 6, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
You asked me what my hobbies and interests are and I'd like to answer, but I'd better
warn you, I have lots of them, so don't be surprised.
First of all: writing, but I don't really think of that as a hobby.
Number two: genealogical charts. I'm looking in every newspaper, book and document I
can find for the family trees of the French, German, Spanish, English, Austrian,
Russian, Norwegian and Dutch royal famthes. I've made great progress with many of
them, because for ! a long time I've been taking notes while reading biogra- I, phies
or history books. I even copy out many of the passages on history.
So my third hobby is history, and Father's already bought me numerous books. I can
hardly wait for the day when I'll be able to go to the public library and ferret out Iii
the information I need.
Number four is Greek and Roman mythology. I have various books on this subject too.
I can name the nine Muses and the seven loves of Zeus. I have the wives of
Hercules, etc., etc., down pat.
My other hobbies are movie stars and family photographs. I'm crazy about reading and
books. I adore the history of the arts, especially when it concerns writers, poets and
painters; musicians may come later. I loathe algebra, geometry and arithmetic. I enjoy
all my other school subjects, but history's my favorite!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
TUESDAY, APRIL 11, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
My head's in a whirl, I really don't know where to begin. Thursday (the last time I
wrote you) everything was as usual. Friday afternoon (Good Friday) we played
Monopoly; Saturday afternoon too. The days passed very quickly. Around two o'clock
on Saturday, heavy firing ii began-machine guns, according to the men. For the rest,
everything was quiet.
Sunday afternoon Peter came to see me at four-thirty, at my invitation. At
five-fifteen we went to the Ii front attic, where we stayed until six. There was a
beautil ful Mozart concert on the radio from six to seven-fifteen; I especially enjoyed
the Kleine Nachtmusik. I can hardly bear to listen in the kitchen, since beautiful music
stirs me to the very depths of my soul. Sunday evening Peter couldn't take his balli,
because the washtub was down in the office kitchen, filled with laundry. The two of
us went to the front attic together, and in order to be able to sit comfortably, I took
along the only cushion I could find in my room. We seated ourselves on a packing
crate. Since both the crate and the cushion were very narrow, we were sitting quite
close, leaning against two other crates; Mouschi kept us company, so we weren't
without a chaperon. Suddenly, at a quarter to nine, Mr. van Daan whistled and asked if
we had Mr. Dussel's cushion. We jumped up and went downstairs willi the cushion, the
cat and Mr. van Daan. This cushion was the source of much misery. Dussel was angry
because I'd taken the one he uses as a pillow, and he was afraid it might be covered
with fleas; he had the entire house in an uproar because of this one cushion. In
revenge, Peter and I stuck two hard brushes in his bed, but had to take them out
again when Dussel unexpectedly decided to go sit in his room. We had a really good
laugh at this little intermezzo.
But our fun was short-lived. At nine-thirty Peter knocked gently on the door and
asked Father to come upstairs and help him with a difficult English sentence.
"That sounds fishy," I said to Margot. "It's obviously a pretext. You can tell by the
way the men are talking that there's been a break-in!" I was right. The warehouse
was being broken into at that very moment. Father, Mr. van Daan and Peter were
downstairs in a flash. Margot, Mother, Mrs. van D. and I waited. Four frightened
women need to talk, so that's what we did until we heard a bang downstairs. After
that all was quiet. The clock struck quarter to ten. The color had drained from our
faces, but we remained calm, even though we were afraid. Where were the men? What
was that bang? Were they fighting with the burglars? We were too scared to think; all
we could do was wait.
Ten o'clock, footsteps on the stairs. Father, pale and nervous, came inside, followed
by Mr. van Daan. "Lights out, tiptoe upstairs, we're expecting the police!" There
wasn't time to be scared. The lights were switched off, I grabbed a jacket, and we sat
down upstairs.
"What happened? Tell us quickly!"
There was no one to tell us; the men had gone back downstairs. The four of them
didn't come back up until ten past ten. Two of them kept watch at Peter's open
window. The door to the landing was locked, the book- case shut. We draped a
sweater over our night-light, and then they told us what had happened:
Peter was on the landing when he heard two loud bangs. He went downstairs and saw
that a large panel was missing from the left half of the warehouse door. He dashed
upstairs, alerted the "Home Guard," and the four of them went downstairs. When they
entered the warehouse, the burglars were going about their business. Without thinking,
Mr. van Daan yelled "Police!" Hur- ried footsteps outside; the burglars had fled. The
board was put back in the door so the police wouldn't notice the gap, but then a swift
kick from outside sent it flying to the floor. The men were amazed at the burglars'
audacity. Both Peter and Mr. van Daan felt a murderous rage come over them. Mr. van
Daan slammed an ax against the floor, and all was quiet again. Once more the panel
was re- placed, and once more the attempt was foiled. Outside, a man and a woman
shone a glaring flashlight through the opening, lighting up the entire warehouse. "What
the . . ." mumbled one of the men, but now their roles had been reversed. Instead of
policemen, they were now burglars. All four of them raced upstairs. Dussel and Mr.
van Daan snatched up Dussel's books, Peter opened the doors and windows in the
kitchen and private office, hurled the phone to the ground, and the four of them finally
ended up behind the bookcase.
END OF PART ONE
In all probability the man and woman with the flashlight had alerted the police. It was
Sunday night, Easter Sunday. The next day, Easter Monday, the office was going to
be closed, which meant we wouldn't be able to move around until Tuesday morning.
Think of it, having to sit in such terror for a day and two nights! We thought of
nothing, but simply sat there in pitch darkness -- in her fear, Mrs. van D. had
switched off the lamp. We whispered, and every time we heard a creak, someone said,
"Shh, shh."
It was ten-thirty, then eleven. Not a sound. Father and Mr. van Daan took turns
coming upstairs to us. Then, at eleven-fifteen, a noise below. Up above you could
hear the whole family breathing. For the rest, no one moved a muscle. Footsteps in
the house, the private office, the kitchen, then. . . on the staircase. All sounds of
breathing stopped, eight hearts pounded. Foot- steps on the stairs, then a rattling at
the bookcase. This moment is indescribable.
"Now we're done for," I said, and I had visions of all fifteen of us being dragged away
by the Gestapo that very night.
More rattling at the bookcase, twice. Then we heard a can fall, and the footsteps
receded. We were out of danger, so far! A shiver went though everyone's body, I
heard several sets of teeth chattering, no one said a word. We stayed like this until
eleven-thirty.
There were no more sounds in the house, but a light was shining on our landing, right
in front of the bookcase. Was that because the police thought it looked so suspicious
or because they simply forgot? Was anyone going to come back and turn it off? We
found our tongues again.
There were no longer any people inside the building, but perhaps someone was
standing guard outside. We then did three things: tried to guess what was going on,
trembled with fear and went to the bathroom. Since the buckets were in the attic, all
we had was Peter's metal wastepaper basket. Mr. van Daan went first, then Father,
but Mother was too embarrassed. Father brought the waste- basket to the next room,
where Margot, Mrs. van Daan and I gratefully made use of it. Mother finally gave in.
There was a great demand for paper, and luckily I had some in my pocket.
The wastebasket stank, everything went on in a whisper, and we were exhausted. It
was midnight.
"Lie down on the floor and go to sleep!" Margot and I were each given a pillow and a
blanket. Margot lay down near the food cupboard, and I made my bed between the
table legs. The smell wasn't quite so bad when you were lying on the floor, but Mrs.
van Daan quietly went and got some powdered bleach and draped a dish towel over
the potty as a further precaution.
Talk, whispers, fear, stench, farting and people continually going to the bathroom; try
sleeping through that! By two-thirty, however, I was so tired I dozed off and didn't
hear a thing until three-thirty. I woke up when Mrs. van D. lay her head on my feet.
"For heaven's sake, give me something to put on!" I said. I was handed some clothes,
but don't ask what: a pair of wool slacks over my pajamas, a red sweater and a black
skirt, white understockings and tattered kneesocks.
Mrs. van D. sat back down on the chair, and Mr. van D. lay down with his head on
my feet. From three- thirty onward I was engrossed in thought, and still shiver- ing
so much that Mr. van Daan couldn't sleep. I was preparing myself for the return of
the police. We'd tell them we were in hiding; if they were good people, we'd be safe,
and if they were Nazi sympathizers, we could try to bribe them!
"We should hide the radio!" moaned Mrs. van D.
"Sure, in the stove," answered Mr. van D. "If they find us, they might as well find the
radio!"
"Then they'll also find Anne's diary," added Father.
"So burn it," suggested the most terrified of the group.
This and the police rattling on the bookcase were the moments when I was most
afraid. Oh, not my diary; if my diary goes, I go too! Thank goodness Father didn't say
anything more.
There's no point in recounting all the conversations; so much was said. I comforted
Mrs. van Daan, who was very frightened. We talked about escaping, being interrogated
by the Gestapo, phoning Mr. Kleiman and being courageous.
"We must behave like soldiers, Mrs. van Daan. If our time has come, well then, it'll be
for Queen and Country, for freedom, truth and justice, as they're always telling us on
the radio. The only bad thing is that we'll drag the others down with us!"
After an hour Mr. van Daan switched places with his wife again, and Father came and
sat beside me. The men smoked one cigarette after another, an occasional sigh was
heard, somebody made another trip to the potty, and then everything began allover
again.
Four o'clock, five, five-thirty. I went and sat with Peter by his window and listened,
so close we could feel each other's bodies trembling; we spoke a word or two from
time to time and listened intently. Next door they took down the blackout screen.
They made a list of everything they were planning to tell Mr. Kleiman over the phone,
because they intended to call him at seven and ask him to send someone over. They
were taking a big chance, since the police guard at the door or in the warehouse
might hear them calling, but there was an even greater risk that the police would
return.
I'm enclosing their list, but for the sake of clarity, I'll copy it here.
Buralary: Police in building, up to bookcase, but no farther. Burglars apparently
interrupted, forced warehouse door, fled through garden. Main entrance bolted; Kugler
must have left through second door.
Typewriter and adding machine safe in black chest in private office.
Miep's or Bep's laundry in washtub in kitchen.
Only Bep or Kugler have key to second door; lock may be broken.
Try to warn jan and get key, look around office; also feed cat.
For the rest, everything went according to plan. Mr. Kleiman was phoned, the poles
were removed from the doors, the typewriter was put back in the chest. Then we all
sat around the table again and waited for either jan or the police.
Peter had dropped off to sleep and Mr. van Daan ANNE FRANK and I were lying on
the floor when we heard loud footsteps below. I got up quietly. "It's Jan!"
"No, no, it's the police!" they all said.
There was a knocking at our bookcase. Miep whis- tled. This was too much for Mrs.
van Daan, who sank limply in her chair, white as a sheet. If the tension had lasted
another minute, she would have fainted.
Jan and Miep came in and were met with a delightful scene. The table alone would
have been worth a photograph: a copy of Cinema &.. Theater, opened to a page of
dancing girls and smeared with jam and pectin, which we'd been taking to combat the
diarrhea, two jam jars, half a bread roll, a quarter of a bread roll, pectin, a mirror, a
comb, matches, ashes, cigarettes, tobacco, an ashtray, books, a pair of underpants, a
flashlight, Mrs. van Daan's comb, toilet paper, etc.
Jan and Miep were of course greeted with shouts and tears. Jan nailed a pinewood
board over the gap in the door and went off again with Miep to inform the police of
the break-in. Miep had also found a note under the ware- house door from Sleegers,
the night watchman, who had noticed the hole and alerted the police. Jan was also
planning to see Sleegers.
So we had half an hour in which to put the house and ourselves to rights. I've never
seen such a transformation as in those thirty minutes. Margot and I got the beds
ready downstairs, went to the bathroom, brushed our teeth, washed our hands and
combed our hair. Then I straightened up the room a bit and went back upstairs. The
table had already been cleared, so we got some water, made coffee and tea, boiled the
milk and set the table. Father and Peter emptied our improvised potties and rinsed
them with warm water and powdered bleach. The largest one was filled to the brim
and was so heavy they had a hard time lifting it. To make things worse, it was
leaking, so they had to put it in a bucket.
At eleven o'clock Jan was back and joined us at the table, and gradually everyone
began to relax. Jan had the following story to tell:
Mr. Sleegers was asleep, but his wife told Jan that her husband had discovered the
hole in the door while making his rounds. He called in a policeman, and the two of
them searched the building. Mr. Sleegers, in his capacity as night watchman, patrols
the area every night on his bike, accompanied by his two dogs. His wife said he would
come on Tuesday and tell Mr. Kugler the rest. No one at the police station seemed to
know anything about the break-in, but they made a note to come first thing Tuesday
morning to have a look.
On the way back Jan happened to run into Mr. van Hoeven, the man who supplies us
with potatoes, and told him of the break-in. "I know," Mr. van Hoeven calmly replied.
"Last night when my wife and I were walking past your building, I saw a gap in the
door. My wife wanted to walk on, but I peeked inside with a flashlight, and that's
when the burglars must have run off. To be on the safe side, I didn't call the police. I
thought it wouldn't be wise in your case. I don't know anything, but I have my
suspicions." Jan thanked him and went on. Mr. van Hoeven obviously suspects we're
here, because he always delivers the potatoes at lunchtime. A decent man!
It was one o'clock by the time Jan left and we'd done the dishes. All eight of us went
to bed. I woke up at quarter to three and saw that Mr. Dussel was already up. My
face rumpled with sleep, I happened to run into Peter in the bathroom, just after he'd
come downstairs. We agreed to meet in the office. I freshened up a bit and went
down.
"After all this, do you still dare go to the front attic?" he asked. I nodded, grabbed
my pillow, with a cloth wrapped around it, and we went up together. The weather was
gorgeous, and even though the air-raid sirens soon began to wail, we stayed where
we were. Peter put his arm around my shoulder, I put mine around his, and we sat
quietly like this until four o'clock, when Margot came to get us for coffee.
We ate our bread, drank our lemonade and joked (we were finally able to again), and
for the rest everything was back to normal. That evening I thanked Peter because he'd
been the bravest of us all.
None of us have ever been in such danger as we were that night. God was truly
watching over us. Just think-the police were right at the bookcase, the light was on,
and still no one had discovered our hiding place! "Now we're done for!" I'd whispered
at that moment, but once again we were spared. When the invasion comes and the
bombs start falling, it'll be every man for himself, but this time we feared for those
good, innocent Christians who are helping us.
"We've been saved, keep on saving us!" That's all we can say.
This incident has brought about a whole lot of changes. As of now, Dussel will be
doing his work in the bathroom, and Peter will be patrolling the house between
eight-thirty and nine-thirty. Peter isn't allowed to open his window anymore, since
one of the Keg people noticed it was open. We can no longer flush the toilet after
nine-thirty at night. Mr. Sleegers has been hired as night watchman, and tonight a
carpenter from the underground is coming to make a barricade out of our white
Frankfurt bedsteads. Debates are going on left and right in the Annex. Mr. Kugler has
reproached us for our carelessness. Jan also said we should never go downstairs. What
we have to do now is find out whether Sleegers can be trusted, whether the dogs will
bark if they hear someone behind the door, how to make the barricade, all sorts of
things.
We've been strongly reminded of the fact that we're Jews in chains, chained to one
spot, without any rights, but with a thousand obligations. We must put our feelings
aside; we must be brave and strong, bear discomfort with- out complaint, do whatever
is in our power and trust in God. One day this terrible war will be over. The time will
come when we'll be people again and not just Jews!
Who has inflicted this on us? Who has set us apart from all the rest? Who has put us
through such suffering? It's God who has made us the way we are, but it's also God
who will lift us up again. In the eyes of the world, we're doomed, but if, after all this
suffering, there are still Jews left, the Jewish people will be held up as an example.
Who knows, maybe our religion will teach the world and all the people in it about
goodness, and that's the reason, the only reason, we have to suffer. We can never be
just Dutch, or just English, or whatever, we will always be Jews as well. And we'll
have to keep on being Jews, but then, we'll want to be.
Be brave! Let's remember our duty and perform it without complaint. There will be a
way out. God has never deserted our people. Through the ages Jews have had to
suffer, but through the ages they've gone on living, and the centuries of suffering have
only made them stronger. The weak shall fall and the strong shall survive and not be
defeated!
That night I really thought I was going to die. I waited for the police and I was ready
for death, like a soldier on a battlefield. I'd gladly have given my life for my country.
But now, now that I've been spared, my first wish after the war is to become a Dutch
citizen. I love the Dutch, I love this country, I love the language, and I want to work
here. And even if I have to write to the Queen herself, I won't give up until I've
reached my goal!
I'm becoming more and more independent of my parents. Young as I am, I face life
with more courage and have a better and truer sense of justice than Mother. I know
what I want, I have a goal, I have opinions, a religion and love. If only I can be
myself, I'll be satisfied. I know that I'm a woman, a woman with inner strength and a
great deal of courage!
If God lets me live, I'll achieve more than Mother ever did, I'll make my voice heard,
I'll go out into the world and work for mankind!
I now know that courage and happiness are needed first!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
FRIDAY, APRIL 14, 1944
Dear Kitty,
Everyone here is still very tense. Pim has nearly reached the bothng point; Mrs. van
D. is lying in bed with a cold, grumbling; Mr. van D. is growing pale without his
cigarettes; Dussel, who's having to give up many of his comforts, is carping at
everyone; etc., etc. We seem to have run out of luck lately. The toilet's leaking, and
the faucet's stuck. Thanks to our many connections, we'll soon be able to get these
repaired.
I'm occasionally sentimental, as you know, but from time to time I have reason to be:
when Peter and I are sitting close together on a hard wooden crate among the junk
and dust, our arms around each other's shoulders, Peter toying with a lock of my hair;
when the birds outside are trilling their songs, when the trees are in bud, when the
sun beckons and the sky is so blue--oh, that's when I wish for so much!
All I see around me are dissatisfied and grumpy faces, all I hear are sighs and stifled
complaints. You'd think our lives had taken a sudden turn for the worse. Honestly,
things are only as bad as you make them. Here in the Annex no one even bothers to
set a good example. We each have to figure out how to get the better of our own
moods!
Every day you hear, "If only it were all over!"
Work, love, courage and hope,
Make me good and help me cope!
I really believe, Kit, that I'm a little nutty today, and I don't know why. My writing's
all mixed up, I'm jump- ing from one thing to another, and sometimes I seriously
doubt whether anyone will ever be interested in this drivel. They'll probably call it
"The Musings of an Ugly Duckling." My diaries certainly won't be of much use to Mr.
Bolkestein or Mr. Gerbrandy.* [* Gerrit Bolkestein was the Minister of Education and
Pieter Gerbrandy was the Prime Minister of the Dutch government in exile in London.
See Anne's letter of March 29, 1944.]
Yours, Anne M. Frank
SATURDAY, APRIL 15, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
"There's just one bad thing after another. When will it all end?" You can sure say that
again. Guess what's happened now? Peter forgot to unbolt the front door. As a result,
Mr. Kugler and the warehouse employees couldn't get in. He went to Keg's, smashed
in our office kitchen window and got in that way. The windows in the Annex were
open, and the Keg people saw that too. What must they be thinking? And van Maaren?
Mr. Kugler's furious. We accuse him of not doing anything to reinforce the doors, and
then we do a stupid thing like this! Peter's extremely upset. At the table, Mother said
she felt more sorry for Peter than for anyone else, and he nearly began to cry. We're
equally to blame, since we usually ask him every day if he's unbolted the door, and so
does Mr. van Daan. Maybe I can go comfort him later on. I want to help him so
much!
Here are the latest news bulletins about life in the Secret Annex over the last few
weeks:
A week ago Saturday, Boche suddenly got sick. He sat quite still and started drooling.
Miep immediately picked him up, rolled him in a towel, tucked him in her shopping bag
and brought him to the dog-and-cat clinic. Boche had some kind of intestinal problem,
so the vet gave him medicine. Peter gave it to him a few times, but Boche soon made
himself scarce. I'll bet he was out courting his sweetheart. But now his nose is
swollen and he meows whenever you pick him up-he was probably trying to steal
food and somebody smacked him. Mouschi lost her voice for a few days. Just when
we decided she had to be taken to the vet too, she started getting better.
We now leave the attic window open a crack every night. Peter and I often sit up
there in the evening.
Thanks to rubber cement and oil paint, our toilet ; could quickly be repaired. The
broken faucet has been replaced.
Luckily, Mr. Kleiman is feeling better. He's going to see a specialist soon. We can
only hope he won't need an operation.
This month we received eight Tation books. Unfortunately, for the next two weeks
beans have been substituted for oatmeal or groats. Our latest delicacy is piccalilli. If
you're out of luck, all you get is a jar full of cucumber and mustard sauce.
Vegetables are hard to come by. There's only lettuce, lettuce and more lettuce. Our
meals consist entirely of potatoes and imitation gravy.
The Russians are in possession of more than half the Crimea. The British aren't
advancing beyond Cassino. We'll have to count on the Western Wall. There have been
a lot of unbelievably heavy air raids. The Registry of Births, Deaths and Marriages in
The Hague was bombed. All Dutch people will be issued new ration registration cards.
Enough for today.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
SUNDAY, APRIL 16, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
Remember yesterday's date, since it was a red-letter day for me. Isn't it an important
day for every girl when she gets her first kiss? Well then, it's no less important to
me. The time Bram kissed me on my right cheek or Mr. Woudstra on my right hand
doesn't count. How did I suddenly come by this kiss? I'll tell you.
Last night at eight I was sitting with Peter on his divan and it wasn't long before he
put an arm around me. (Since it was Saturday, he wasn't wearing his overalls.)"Why
don t we move over a little," I said, "so won t keep bumping my head against the
cupboard."
He moved so far over he was practically in the corner. I slipped my arm under his
and across his back, and he put his arm around my shoulder, so that I was nearly
engulfed by him. We've sat like this on other occasions, but never so close as we
were last night. He held me firmly against him, my left side against his chest; my
heart had already begun to beat faster, but there was more to come. He wasn't
satisfied until my head lay on his shoulder, with his on top of mine. I sat up again
after about five minutes, but before long he took my head in his hands and put it back
next to his. Oh, it was so wonderful. I could hardly talk, my pleasure was too intense;
he caressed my cheek and arm, a bit clumsily, and played with my hair. Most of the
time our heads were touching.
I can't tell you, Kitty, the feeling that ran through me. I was too happy for words, and
I think he was too.
At nine-thirty we stood up. Peter put on his tennis shoes so he wouldn't make much
noise on his nightly round of the building, and I was standing next to him. How I
suddenly made the right movement, I don't know, but before we went downstairs, he
gave me a. kiss, through my hair, half on my left cheek and half on my ear. I tore
downstairs without looking back, and I long so much for today.
Sunday morning, just before eleven.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
MONDAY, APRIL 17, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Do you think Father and Mother would approve of a girl my age sitting on a divan and
kissing a seventeen-and- a-half-year-old boy? I doubt they would, but I have to
trust my own judgment in this matter. It's so peaceful and safe, lying in his arms and
dreaming, it's so thrilling to feel his cheek against mine, it's so wonderful to know
there's someone waiting for me. But, and there is a but, will Peter want to leave it at
that? I haven't forgotten his promise, but. . . he is a boy!
I know I'm starting at a very young age. Not even fifteen and already so independent
-- that's a little hard for other people to understand. I'm pretty sure Margot would
never kiss a boy unless there was some talk of an engagement or marriage. Neither
Peter nor I has any such plans. I'm also sure that Mother never touched a man before
she met Father. What would my girlfriends or Jacque say if they knew I'd lain in
Peter's arms with my heart against his chest, my head on his shoulder and his head
and face against mine!
Oh, Anne, how terribly shocking! But seriously, I don't think it's at all shocking; we're
cooped up here, cut off from the world, anxious and fearful, especially lately. Why
should we stay apart when we love each other? Why shouldn't we kiss each other in
times like these? Why should we wait until we've reached a suitable age? Why should
we ask anybody's permission?
I've decided to look out for my own interests. He'd never want to hurt me or make
me unhappy. Why shouldn't I do what my heart tells me and makes both of us happy?
Yet I have a feeling, Kitty, that you can sense my doubt. It must be my honesty
rising in revolt against all this sneaking around. Do you think it's my duty to tell
Father what I'm up to? Do you think our secret should be shared with a third person?
Much of the beauty would be lost, but would it make me feel better inside? I'll bring
it up with him.
Oh, yes, I still have so much I want to discuss with him, since I don't see the point
of just cuddling. Sharing our thoughts with each other requires a great deal of trust,
but we'll both be stronger because of it!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
P.S. We were up at six yesterday morning, because the whole family heard the sounds
of a break-in again. It must have been one of our neighbors who was the victim this
time. When we checked at seven o'clock, our doors were still shut tight, thank
goodness!
TUESDAY, APRIL 18,1944
Dearest Kitty,
Everything's fine here. Last night the carpenter came again to put some sheets of iron
over the door panels. Father just got through saying he definitely expects large-scale
operations in Russia and Italy, as well as in the West, before May 20; the longer the
war lasts, the harder it is to imagine being liberated from this place.
Yesterday Peter and I finally got around to having the talk we've been postponing for
the last ten days. I told him all about girls, without hesitating to discuss the most
intimate matters. I found it rather amusing that he thought the opening in a woman's
body was simply left out of illustrations. He couldn't imagine that it was actually
located between a woman's legs. The evening ended with a mutual kiss, near the
mouth. It's really a lovely feeling!
I might take my "favorite quotes notebook" up with me sometime so Peter and I can
go more deeply into matters. I don't think lying in each other's arms day in and day
out is very satisfying, and I hope he feels the same.
After our mild winter we've been having a beautiful spring. April is glorious, not too
hot and not too cold, with occasional light showers. Our chestnut tree is in leaf, and
here and there you can already see a few small blossoms.
Bep presented us Saturday with four bouquets of flowers: three bouquets of daffodils,
and one bouquet of grape hyacinths for me. Mr. Kugler is supplying us with more and
more newspapers.
It's time to do my algebra, Kitty. Bye.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 19, 1944
Dearest Darling,
(That's the title of a movie with Dorit Kreysler, Ida Wust and Harald Paulsen!)
What could be nicer than sitting before an open window, enjoying nature, listening to
the birds sing, feeling the sun on your cheeks and holding a darling boy in your arms?
I feel so peaceful and safe with his arm around me, knowing he's near and yet not
having to speak; how can this be bad when it does me so much good? Oh, if only we
were never disturbed again, not even by Mouschi.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
FRIDAY, APRIL 21,1944
My dearest Kitty,
I stayed in bed yesterday with a sore throat, but since I was already bored the very
first afternoon and didn't have a fever, I got up today. My sore throat has nearly
"verschwunden"* [* disappeared].
Yesterday, as you've probably already discovered, was our Fiihrer's fifty-fifth
birthday. Today is the eighteenth birthday of Her Royal Highness Princess Elizabeth of
York. The BBC reported that she hasn't yet been declared of age, though royal
children usually are. We've been wondering which prince they'll marry this beauty off
to, but can't think of a suitable candidate; perhaps her sister, Princess Margaret Rose,
can have Crown Prince Baudouin of Belgium!
Here we've been going from one disaster to the next. No sooner have the outside
doors been reinforced than van Maaren rears his head again. In all likelihood he's the
one who stole the potato flour, and now he's trying to pin the blame on Bep. Not
surprisingly, the Annex is once again in an uproar. Bep is beside herself with rage.
Perhaps Mr. Kugler will finally have this shady character tailed.
The appraiser from Beethovenstraat was here this morning. He offered us 400 guilders
for our chest; in our opinion, the other estimates are also too low.
I want to ask the magazine The Prince if they'll take one of my fairy tales, under a
pseudonym, of course. But up to now all my fairy tales have been too long, so I don't
think I have much of a chance.
Until the next time, darling.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
TUESDAY, APRIL 25, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
For the last ten days Dussel hasn't been on speaking terms with Mr. van Daan, and all
because of the new security measures since the break-in. One of these was that he's
no longer allowed to go downstairs in the evenings. Peter and Mr. van Daan make the
last round every night at nine-thirty, and after that no one may go downstairs. We
can't flush the toilet anymore after eight at night or after eight in the morning. The
windows may be opened only in the morning when the lights go on in Mr. Kugler's
office, and they can no longer be propped open with a stick at night. This last
measure is the reason for Dussel's sulking. He claims that Mr. van Daan bawled him
out, but he has only himself to blame. He says he'd rather live without food than
without air, and that they simply must figure out a way to keep the windows open.
"I'll have to speak to Mr. Kugler about this," he said to me.
I replied that we never discussed matters of this sort with Mr. Kugler, only within the
group.
"Everything's always happening behind my back. I'll have to talk to your father about
that."
He's also not allowed to sit in Mr. Kugler's office anymore on Saturday afternoons or
Sundays, because the manager of Keg's might hear him if he happens to be next door.
Dussel promptly went and sat there anyway. Mr. van Daan was furious, and Father
went downstairs to talk to Dussel, who came up with some flimsy excuse, but even
Father didn't fall for it this time. Now Father's keep- ing his dealings with Dussel to
a minimum because Dussel insulted him. Not one of us knows what he said, but it
must have been pretty awful.
And to think that that miserable man has his birthday next week. How can you
celebrate your birthday when you've got the sulks, how can you accept gifts from
people you won't even talk to?
Mr. Voskuijl is going downhill rapidly. For more than ten days he's had a temperature
of almost a hundred and four. The doctor said his condition is hopeless; they think the
cancer has spread to his lungs. The poor man, we'd so like to help him, but only God
can help him now!
I've written an amusing story called "Blurry the Explorer," which was a big hit with
my three listeners.
I still have a bad cold and have passed it on to Margot, as well as Mother and Father.
If only Peter doesn't get it. He insisted on a kiss, and called me his El Dorado. You
can't call a person that, silly boy! But he's sweet anyway!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
THURSDAY, APRIL 27, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Mrs. van D. was in a bad mood this morning. All she did was complain, first about her
cold, not being able to get cough drops and the agony of having to blow her nose all
the time. Next she grumbled that the sun wasn't shining, the invasion hadn't started,
we weren't allowed to look out the windows, etc., etc. We couldn't help but laugh at
her, and it couldn't have been that bad, since she soon joined in.
Our recipe for potato kugel, modified due to lack of onions:
Put peeled potatoes through a food mill and add a little dry government-issue flour
and salt. Grease a mold or ovenproof dish with paraffin or stearin and bake for 21/2
hours. Serve with rotten strawberry compote. (Onions not available. Nor oil for mold
or dough!)
At the moment I'm reading Emperor Charles V, written by a professor at the
University of Gottingen; he's spent forty years working on this book. It took me five
days to read fifty pages. I can't do any more than that. Since the book has 598 pages,
you can figure out just how long it's going to take me. And that's not even counting
the second volume. But. . . very interesting!
The things a schoolgirl has to do in the course of a single day! Take me, for
example. First, I translated a passage on Nelson's last battle from Dutch into English.
Then, I read more about the Northern War (1700-21) involving Peter the Great,
Charles XII, Augustus the Strong, Stanislaus Leczinsky, Mazeppa, von Gorz, Brandenburg, Western Pomerania, Eastern Pomerania and Denmark, plus the usual dates.
Next, I wound up in Brazil, where I read about Bahia tobacco, the abundance of coffee,
the one and a half million inhabitants of Rio de Janeiro, Pernambuco and Sao Paulo
and, last but not least, the Amazon River. Then about Negroes, mulattoes, mestizos,
whites, the illiteracy rate -- over 50 percent -- and malaria. Since I had some time
left, I glanced through a genealogical chart: John the Old, William Louis, Ernest
Casimir I, Henry Casimir I, right up to little Margriet Franciska (born in 1943 in
Ottawa).
Twelve o'clock: I resumed my studies in the attic, reading about deans, priests,
ministers, popes and . . . whew, it was one o'clock!
At two the poor child (ho hum) was back at work. Old World and New World
monkeys were next. Kitty, tell me quickly, how many toes does a hippopotamus have?
Then came the Bible, Noah's Ark, Shem, Ham and Japheth. After that, Charles V.
Then, with Peter, Thack- eray's book about the colonel, in English. A French test,
and then a comparison between the Mississippi and the Missouri!
Enough for today. Adieu!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
FRIDAY, APRIL 28, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
I've never forgotten my dream of Peter Schiff (see the beginning of January). Even
now I can still feel his cheek against mine, and that wonderful glow that made up for
all the rest. Once in a while I'd had the same feeling with this Peter, but never so
intensely. . . until last night. We were sitting on the divan, as usual, in each other's
arms. Suddenly the everyday Anne slipped away and the second Anne took her place.
The second Anne, who's never overconfident or amusing, but wants only to love and
be gentle.
I sat pressed against him and felt a wave of emotion come over me. Tears rushed to
my eyes; those from the left fell on his overalls, while those from the right trickled
down my nose and into the air and landed beside the first. Did he notice? He made no
movement to show that he had. Did he feel the same way I did? He hardly said a
word. Did he realize he had two Annes at his side? My questions went unanswered.
At eight-thirty I stood up and went to the window, where we always say good-bye. I
was still trembling, I was still Anne number two. He came over to me, and I threw
my arms around his neck and kissed him on his left cheek. I was about to kiss the
other cheek when my mouth met his, and we pressed our lips together. In a daze, we
embraced, over and over again, never to stop, oh!
Peter needs tenderness. For the first time in his life he's discovered a girl; for the
first time he's seen that even the biggest pests also have an inner self and a heart,
and are transformed as soon as they're alone with you. For the first time in his life
he's given himself and his friendship to another person. He's never had a friend
before, boy or girl. Now we've found each other. I, for that matter, didn't know him
either, had never had someone I could confide in, and it's led to this . . .
The same question keeps nagging me: "Is it right?" Is it right for me to yield so soon,
for me to be so passionate, to be filled with as much passion and desire as Peter?
Can I, a girl, allow myself to go that far?
There's only one possible answer: "I'm longing so much. . . and have for such a long
time. I'm so lonely and now I've found comfort!"
In the mornings we act normally, in the afternoons too, except now and then. But in
the evenings the suppressed longing of the entire day, the happiness and the bliss of
all the times before come rushing to the surface, and all we can think about is each
other. Every night, after our last kiss, I feel like running away and never looking him
in the eyes again. Away, far away into the darkness and alone!
And what awaits me at the bottom of those fourteen stairs? Bright lights, questions
and laughter. I have to act normally and hope they don't notice anything.
My heart is still too tender to be able to recover so quickly from a shock like the one
I had last night. The gentle Anne makes infrequent appearances, and she's not about
to let herself be shoved out the door so soon after she's arrived. Peter's reached a
part of me that no one has ever reached before, except in my dream! He's taken hold
of me and turned me inside out. Doesn't everyone need a little quiet time to put
themselves to rights again? Oh, Peter, what have you done to me? What do you want
from me?
Where will this lead? Oh, now I understand Bep. Now, now that I'm going through it
myself, I understand her doubts; if I were older and he wanted to marry me, what
would my answer be? Anne, be honest! You wouldn't be able to marry him. But it's so
hard to let go. Peter still has too little character, too little willpower, too little
courage and strength. He's still a child, emotionally no older than I am; all he wants is
happiness and peace of mind. Am I really only fourteen? Am I really just a silly
schoolgirl? Am I really so inexperienced in everything? I have more experience than
most; I've experienced something almost no one my age ever has.
I'm afraid of myself, afraid my longing is making me yield too soon. How can it ever
go right with other boys later on? Oh, it's so hard, the eternal struggle between heart
and mind. There's a time and a place for both, but how can I be sure that I've chosen
the right time?
Yours, Anne M. Frank
TUESDAY, MAY 2, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Saturday night I asked Peter whether he thinks I should tell Father about us. After
we'd discussed it, he said he thought I should. I was glad; it shows he's sensible, and
sensitive. As soon as I came downstairs, I went with Father to get some water. While
we were on the stairs, I said, "Father, I'm sure you've gathered that when Peter and I
are together, we don't exactly sit at opposite ends of the room. Do you think that's
wrong?"
Father paused before answering: "No, I don't think it's wrong. But Anne, when you're
living so close together, as we do, you have to be careful." He said some other words
to that effect, and then we went upstairs.
Sunday morning he called me to him and said, "Anne, I've been thinking about what
you said." (Oh, oh, I knew what was coming!) "Here in the Annex it's not such a
good idea. I thought you were just friends. Is Peter in love with you?"
"Of course not," I answered.
"Well, you know I understand both of you. But you must be the one to show restraint;
don't go upstairs so often, don't encourage him more than you can help. In matters
like these, it's always the man who takes the active role, and it's up to the woman to
set the limits. Outside, where you're free, things are quite different. You see other
boys and girls, you can go outdoors, take part in sports and all kinds of activities. But
here, if you're together too much and want to get away, you can't. You see each other
every hour of the day-all the time, in fact. Be careful, Anne, and don't take it too
seriously!
"I don't, Father, but Peter's a decent boy, a nice boy."
"Yes, but he doesn't have much strength of character. He can easily be influenced to
do good, but also to do bad. I hope for his sake that he stays good, because he's
basically a good person."
We talked some more and agreed that Father would speak to him too.
Sunday afternoon when we were in the front attic, Peter asked, "Have you talked to
your Father yet, Anne?"
"Yes," I replied, "I'll tell you all about it. He doesn't think it's wrong, but he says that
here, where we're in such close quarters, it could lead to conflicts."
"We've already agreed not to quarrel, and I plan to keep my promise."
"Me too, Peter. But Father didn't think we were serious, he thought we were just
friends. Do you think we still can be?"
"Yes, I do. How about you?"
"Me too. I also told Father that I trust you. I do trust you, Peter, just as much as I
do Father. And I think you're worthy of my trust. You are, aren't you?"
"I hope so." (He was very shy, and blushing.)
"I believe in you, Peter," I continued. "I believe you have a good character and that
you'll get ahead in this world."
After that we talked about other things. Later I said, "If we ever get out of here, I
know you won't give me another thought."
He got all fired up. "That's not true, Anne. Oh no, I won't let you even think that
about me!"
Just then somebody called us.
Father did talk to him, he told me Monday. "Your Father thought our friendship might
turn into love," he said. "But I told him we'd keep ourselves under control."
Father wants me to stop going upstairs so often, but I don't want to. Not just because
I like being with Peter, but because I've said I trust him. I do trust him, and I want
to prove it to him, but I'll never be able to if I stay downstairs out of distrust.
No, I'm going!
In the meantime, the Dussel drama has been resolved. Saturday evening at dinner he
apologized in beautiful Dutch. Mr. van Daan was immediately reconciled. Dussel must
have spent all day practicing his speech.
Sunday, his birthday, passed without incident. We gave him a bottle of good wine from
1919, the van Daans (who can now give their gift after all) presented him with a jar
of piccalilli and a package of razor blades, and Mr. Kugler gave him a jar of lemon
syrup (to make lemonade), Miep a book, Little Martin, and Bep a plant. He treated
everyone to an egg.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
WEDNESDAY, MAY 3, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
First the weekly news! We're having a vacation from politics. There's nothing, and I
mean absolutely nothing, to report. I'm also gradually starting to believe that the
invasion will come. After all, they can't let the Russians do all the dirty work;
actually, the Russians aren't doing anything at the moment either.
Mr. Kleiman comes to the office every morning now. He got a new set of springs for
Peter's divan, so Peter will have to get to work reupholstering it; Not surprisingly, he
isn't at all in the mood. Mr. Kleiman also brought some flea powder for the cats.
Have I told you that our Boche has disappeared? We haven't seen hide nor hair of her
since last Thursday. She's probably already in cat heaven, while some animal lover has
turned her into a tasty dish. Perhaps some girl who can afford it will be wearing a
cap made of Boche's fur. Peter is heartbroken.
For the last two weeks we've been eating lunch at eleven-thirty on Saturdays; in the
mornings we have to make do with a cup of hot cereal. Starting tomorrow it'll be like
this every day; that saves us a meal. Vegetables are still very hard to come by. This
afternoon we had rotten boiled lettuce. Ordinary lettuce, spinach and boiled let- tuce,
that's all there is. Add to that rotten potatoes, and you have a meal fit for a king!
I hadn't had my period for more than two months, but it finally started last Sunday.
Despite the mess and bother, I'm glad it hasn't deserted me.
As you can no doubt imagine, we often say in despair, "What's the point of the war?
Why, oh, why can't people live together peacefully? Why all this destruction?"
The question is understandable, but up to now no one has come up with a satisfactory
answer. Why is England manufacturing bigger and better airplanes and bombs and at
the same time churning out new houses for reconstruction? Why are millions spent on
the war each day, while not a penny is available for medical science, artists or the
poor? Why do people have to starve when mountains of food are rotting away in other
parts of the world? Oh, why are people so crazy?
I don't believe the war is simply the work of politicians and capitalists. Oh no, the
common man is every bit as guilty; otherwise, people and nations would have rebelled long ago! There's a destructive urge in people, the urge to rage, murder and
kill. And until all of humanity, without exception, undergoes a metamorphosis, wars
will continue to be waged, and everything that has been carefully built up, cultivated
and grown will be cut down and destroyed, only to start allover again!
I've often been down in the dumps, but never desperate. I look upon our life in hiding
as an interesting adventure, full of danger and romance, and every privation as an
amusing addition to my diary. I've made up my mind to lead a different life from other
girls, and not to become an ordinary housewife later on. What I'm experiencing here is
a good beginning to an interesting life, and that's the reason -- the only reason --
why I have to laugh at the humorous side of the most dangerous moments.
I'm young and have many hidden qualities; I'm young and strong and living through a
big adventure; I'm right in the middle of it and can't spend all day complaining because
it's impossible to have any fun! I'm blessed with many things: happiness, a cheerful
disposition and strength. Every day I feel myself maturing, I feel liberation drawing
near, I feel the beauty of nature and the goodness of the people around me. Every
day I think what a fascinating and amusing adventure this is! With all that, why should
I despair?
Yours, Anne M. Frank
FRIDAY, MAY 5, 1944
Dear Kitty,
Father's unhappy with me. After our talk on Sunday he thought I'd stop going upstairs
every evening. He won't have any of that "Knutscherej"* [* Necking] going on. I can't
stand that word. Talking about it was bad enough -- why does he have to make me
feel bad too! I'll have a word with him today. Margot gave me some good advice.
Here's more or less what I'd like to say:
I think you expect an explanation from me, Father, so I'll give you one. You're disappointed in me, you expected more restraint from me, you no doubt want me to act the
way a fourteen-year-old is supposed to. But that's where you're wrong!
Since we've been here, from July 1942 until a few weeks ago, I haven't had an easy
time. If only you knew how much I used to cry at night, how unhappy and despondent
I was, how lonely I felt, you'd understand my wanting to go upstairs! I've now
reached the point where I don't need the support of Mother or anyone else. It didn't
happen overnight. I've struggled long and hard and shed many tears to become as
independent as I am now. You can laugh and refuse to believe me, but I don't care. I
know I'm an independent person, and I don't feel I need to account to you for my
actions. I'm only telling you this because I don't want you to think I'm doing things
behind your back. But there's only one person I'm accountable to, and that's me.
When I was having problems, everyone -- and that includes you -- closed their
eyes and ears and didn't help me. On the contrary, all I ever got were admonitions not
to be so noisy. I was noisy only to keep myself from being miserable all the time. I
was overconfident to keep from having to listen to the voice inside me. I've been
putting on an act for the last year and a half, day in, day out. I've never complained
or dropped my mask, nothing of the kind, and now. . . now the battle is over. I've
won! I'm independent, in both body and mind. I don't need a mother anymore, and I've
emerged from the struggle a stronger person.
Now that it's over, now that I know the battle has been won, I want to go my own
way, to follow the path that seems right to me. Don't think of me as a
fourteen-year-old, since all these troubles have made me older; I won't regret my
actions, I'll behave the way I think I should!
Gentle persuasion won't keep me from going upstairs. You'll either have to forbid it, or
trust me through thick and thin. Whatever you do, just leave me alone!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
SATURDAY, MAY 6, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Last night before dinner I tucked the letter I'd written into Father's pocket. According
to Margot, he read it and was upset for the rest of the evening. (I was upstairs doing
the dishes!) Poor Pim, I might have known what the effect of such an epistle would
be. He's so sensitive! I immediately told Peter not to ask any questions or say
anything more. Pim's said nothing else to me about the matter. Is he going to?
Everything here is more or less back to normal. We can hardly believe what Jan, Mr.
Kugler and Mr. Kleiman tell us about the prices and the people on the outside; half a
pound of tea costs 350.00 guilders, half a pound of coffee 80.00 guilders, a pound of
butter 35.00 guilders, one egg 1.45 guilders. People are paying 14.00 guilders an
ounce for Bulgarian tobacco! Everyone's trading on the black market; every errand boy
has something to offer. The delivery boy from the bakery has supplied us with darning
thread-90 cents for one measly skein-the milkman can get hold of ration books, an
undertaker delivers cheese. Break-ins, murders and thefts are daily occurrences. Even
the police and night watchmen are getting in on the act. Everyone wants to put food
in their stomachs, and since salaries have been frozen, people have had to resort to
swindling. The police have their hands full trying to track down the many girls of
fifteen, sixteen, seventeen and older who are reported missing every day.
I want to try to finish my story about Ellen, the fairy. Just for fun, I can give it to
Father on his birthday, together with all the copyrights.
See you later! (Actually, that's not the right phrase. In the German program broadcast
from England they always close with "Aufwiederhoren." So I guess I should say, "Until
we write again.")
Yours, Anne M. Frank
SUNDAY MORNING, MAY 7,1944
Dearest Kitty,
Father and I had a long talk yesterday afternoon. I cried my eyes out, and he cried
too. Do you know what he said to me, Kitty?
"I've received many letters in my lifetime, but none as hurtful as this. You, who have
had so much love from your parents. You, whose parents have always been ready to
help you, who have always defended you, no matter what. You talk of not having to
account to us for your actions! You feel you've been wronged and left to your own
devices. No, Anne, you've done us a great injustice!
"Perhaps you didn't mean it that way, but that's what you wrote. No, Anne, we have
done nothing to deserve such a reproach!"
Oh, I've failed miserably. This is the worst thing I've ever done in my entire life. I
used my tears to show off, to make myself seem important so he'd respect me. I've
certainly had my share of unhappiness, and everything I said about Mother is true. But
to accuse Pim, who's so good and who's done everything for me-no, that was too
cruel for words.
It's good that somebody has finally cut me down to size, has broken my pride,
because I've been far too smug. Not everything Mistress Anne does is good! Anyone who deliberately causes such pain to someone they say they love is despicable,
the lowest of the low!
What I'm most ashamed of is the way Father has forgiven me; he said he's going to
throw the letter in the stove, and he's being so nice to me now, as if he were the
one who'd done something wrong. Well, Anne, you still have a lot to learn. It's time
you made a beginning, in- stead of looking down at others and always giving them the
blame!
I've known a lot of sorrow, but who hasn't at my age? I've been putting on an act, but
was hardly even aware of it. I've felt lonely, but never desperate! Not like Father,
who once ran out into the street with a knife so he could put an end to it all. I've
never gone that far.
I should be deeply ashamed of myself, and I am. What's done can't be undone, but at
least you can keep it from happening again. I'd like to start all over, and that shouldn't
be difficult, now that I have Peter. With him supporting me, I know I can do it! I'm
not alone anymore. He loves me, I love him, I have my books, my writing and my
diary. I'm not all that ugly, or that stupid, I have a sunny disposition, and I want to
develop a good character!
Yes, Anne, you knew full well that your letter was unkind and untrue, but you were
actually proud of it! I'll take Father as my example once again, and I will improve
myself.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
MONDAY, MAY 8, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Have I ever told you anything about our family? I don't think I have, so let me begin.
Father was born in Frankfurt am Main to very wealthy parents: Michael Frank owned
a bank and became a millionaire, and Alice Stern's parents were prominent and
well-to-do. Michael Frank didn't start out rich; he was a self-made man. In his
youth Father led the life of a rich man's son. Parties every week, balls, banquets,
beautiful girls, waltzing, dinners, a huge house, etc. After Grandpa died, most of the
money was lost, and after the Great War and inflation there was nothing left at all. Up
until the war there were still quite a few rich relatives. So Father was extremely
well-bred, and he had to laugh yesterday because for the first time in his fifty-five
years, he scraped out the frying pan at the table.
Mother's family wasn't as wealthy, but still fairly well-off, and we've listened
openmouthed to stories of private balls, dinners and engagement parties with 250
guests.
We're far from rich now, but I've pinned all my hopes on after the war. I can assure
you, I'm not so set on a bourgeois life as Mother and Margot. I'd like to spend a year
in Paris and London learning the languages and studying art history. Compare that with
Margot, who wants to nurse newborns in Palestine. I still have visions of gorgeous
dresses and fascinating people. As I've told you many times before, I want to see the
world and do all kinds of exciting things, and a little money won't hurt!
This morning Miep told us about her cousin's engagement party, which she went to on
Saturday. The cousin's parents are rich, and the groom's are even richer. Miep made
our mouths water telling us about the food that was served: vegetable soup with
meatballs, cheese, rolls with sliced meat, hors d'oeuvres made with eggs and roast
beef, rolls with cheese, genoise, wine and cigarettes, and you could eat as much as
you wanted.
Miep drank ten schnapps and smoked three cigarettes -- could this be our
temperance advocate? If Miep drank all those, I wonder how many her spouse
managed to toss down? Everyone at the party was a little tipsy, of course. There
were also two officers from the Homicide Squad, who took photographs of the wedding
couple. You can see we're never far from Miep's thoughts, since she promptly noted
their names and addresses in case anything should happen and we needed contacts
with good Dutch people.
Our mouths were watering so much. We, who'd had nothing but two spoonfuls of hot
cereal for breakfast and were absolutely famished; we, who get nothing but
half-cooked spinach (for the vitamins!) and rotten pota- toes day after day; we, who
fill our empty stomachs with nothing but boiled lettuce, raw lettuce, spinach, spinach
and more spinach. Maybe we'll end up being as strong as Popeye, though up to now
I've seen no sign of it!
If Miep had taken us along to the party, there wouldn't have been any rolls left over
for the other guests. If we'd been there, we'd have snatched up everything in sight,
including the furniture. I tell you, we were practically pulling the words right out of
her mouth. We were gathered around her as if we'd never in all our lives heard of"
delicious food or elegant people! And these are the granddaughters of the distinguished
millionaire. The world is a crazy place!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
TUESDAY, MAY 9, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
I've finished my story about Ellen, the fairy. I've copied it out on nice notepaper,
decorated it with red ink and sewn the pages together. The whole thing looks quite
pretty, but I don't know if it's enough of a birthday present. Margot and Mother have
both written poems.
Mr. Kugler came upstairs this afternoon with the news that starting Monday, Mrs.
Broks would like to spend two hours in the office every afternoon. Just imagine! The
office staff won't be able to come upstairs, the potatoes can't be delivered, Bep won't
get her dinner, we can't go to the bathroom, we won't be able to move and all sorts
of other inconveniences! We proposed a variety of ways to get rid of her. Mr. van
Daan thought a good laxative in her coffee might do the trick. "No," Mr. Kleiman
answered, "please don't, or we'll never get her off the can.
A roar of laughter. "The can?" Mrs. van D. asked. "What does that mean?" An
explanation was given. "Is it all right to use that word?" she asked in perfect
innocence. "Just imagine," Bep giggled, "there you are shopping at The Bijenkorf and
you ask the way to the can. They wouldn't even know what you were talking about!"
Dussel now sits on the "can," to borrow the expression, every day at twelve-thirty on
the dot. This afternoon I boldly took a piece of pink paper and wrote:
Mr. Dussel's Toilet Timetable
Mornings from 7: 15 to 7:30 A.M.
Afternoons after 1 P.M.
Otherwise, only as needed!
I tacked this to the green bathroom door while he was still inside. I might well have
added' 'Transgressors will be subject to confinement!" Because our bathroom can be
locked from both the inside and the outside.
Mr. van Daan's latest joke:
After a Bible lesson about Adam and Eve, a thirteen-year-old boy asked his father,
"Tell me, Father, how did I get born?"
"Well," the father replied, "the stork plucked you out of the ocean, set you down in
Mother's bed and bit her in the leg, hard. It bled so much she had to stay in bed for
a week."
Not fully satisfied, the boy went to his mother. "Tell me, Mother," he asked, "how did
you get born and how did I get born?"
His mother told him the very same story. Finally, hoping to hear the fine points, he
went to his grandfather. "Tell me, Grandfather," he said, "how did you get born and
how did your daughter get born?" And for the third time he was told exactly the same
story.
That night he wrote in his diary: "After careful inquiry, I must conclude that there has
been no sexual intercourse in our family for the last three generations!"
I still have work to do; it's already three o'clock.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
PS. Since I think I've mentioned the new cleaning lady, I just want to note that she's
married, sixty years old and hard of hearing! Very convenient, in view of all the noise
that eight people in hiding are capable of mak- ing.
Oh, Kit, it's such lovely weather. If only I could go outside!
WEDNESDAY, MAY 10, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
We were sitting in the attic yesterday afternoon working on our French when suddenly
I heard the splatter of water behind me. I asked Peter what it might be. Without
pausing to reply, he dashed up to the loft-the scene of the disaster -- and shoved
Mouschi, who was squatting beside her soggy litter box, back to the right place. This
was followed by shouts and squeals, and then Mouschi, who by that time had finished
peeing, took off downstairs. In search of something similar to her box, Mouschi had
found herself a pile of wood shavings, right over a crack in the floor. The puddle
immediately trickled down to the attic and, as luck would have it, landed in and next
to the potato barrel. The cethng was dripping, and since the attic floor has also got its
share of cracks, little yellow drops were leaking through the ceiling and onto the
dining table, between a pile of stockings and books.
I was doubled up with laughter, it was such a funny sight. There was Mouschi
crouched under a chair, Peter armed with water, powdered bleach and a cloth, and Mr.
van Daan trying to calm everyone down. The room was soon set to rights, but it's a
well-known fact that cat puddles stink to high heaven. The potatoes proved that all
too well, as did the wood shavings, which Father collected in a bucket and brought
downstairs to burn.
Poor Mouschi! How were you to know it's impossible to get peat for your box?
Anne
THURSDAY, MAY 11, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
A new sketch to make you laugh:
Peter's hair had to be cut, and as usual his mother was to be the hairdresser. At
seven twenty-five Peter vanished into his room, and reappeared at the stroke of
seven-thirty, stripped down to his blue swimming trunks and a pair of tennis shoes.
"Are you coming?" he asked his mother.
"Yes, I'll be up in a minute, but I can't find the scissors!"
Peter helped her look, rummaging around in her cosmetics drawer. "Don't make such a
mess, Peter," she grumbled.
I didn't catch Peter's reply, but it must have been insolent, because she cuffed him on
the arm. He cuffed her back, she punched him with all her might, and Peter pulled his
arm away with a look of mock horror on his face. "Come on, old girl!"
Mrs. van D. stayed put. Peter grabbed her by the wrists and pulled her all around the
room. She laughed, cried, scolded and kicked, but nothing helped. Peter led his
prisoner as far as the attic stairs, where he was obliged to let go of her. Mrs. van D.
came back to the room and collapsed into a chair with a loud sigh.
"Die Enifu"hruna der Mutter,". I joked. [* The Abduction of Mother, a possible
reference to Mozart's opera The Abduction from the Seraglio.]
"Yes, but he hurt me."
I went to have a look and cooled her hot, red wrists with water. Peter, still by the
stairs and growing impa- tient again, strode into the room with his belt in his hand,
like a lion tamer. Mrs. van D. didn't move, but stayed by her writing desk, looking for
a handkerchief. "You've got to apologize first."
"All right, I hereby offer my apologies, but only because if I don't, we'll be here till
midnight."
Mrs. van D. had to laugh in spite of herself. She got up and went toward the door,
where she felt obliged to give us an explanation. (By us I mean Father, Mother and
me; we were busy doing the dishes.) "He wasn't like this at home," she said. "I'd
have belted him so hard he'd have gone flying down the stairs [!]. He's never been so
insolent. This isn't the first time he's deserved a good hiding. That's what you get
with a modern upbringing, modern children. I'd never have grabbed my mother like
that. Did you treat your mother that way, Mr. Frank?" She was very upset, pacing
back and forth, saying whatever came into her head, and she still hadn't gone upstairs.
Finally, at long last, she made her exit.
Less than five minutes later she stormed back down the stairs, with her cheeks all
puffed out, and flung her apron on a chair. When I asked if she was through, she
replied that she was going downstairs. She tore down the stairs like a tornado,
probably straight into the arms of her Putti.
She didn't come up again until eight, this time with her husband. Peter was dragged
from the attic, given a merciless scolding and showered with abuse: ill-mannered brat,
no-good bum, bad example, Anne this, Margot that, I couldn't hear the rest.
Everything seems to have calmed down again today!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
P.S. Tuesday and Wednesday evening our beloved Queen addressed the country. She's
taking a vacation so she'll be in good health for her return to the Netherlands.
She used words like "soon, when I'm back in Holland," "a swift liberation," "heroism"
and "heavy burdens."
This was followed by a speech by Prime Minister Gerbrandy. He has such a squeaky
little child's voice that Mother instinctively said, "Oooh." A clergyman, who must have
borrowed his voice from Mr. Edel, concluded by asking God to take care of the Jews,
all those in concentration camps and prisons and everyone working in Germany.
THURSDAY, MAY 11, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Since I've left my entire "junk box" -- including my fountain pen -- upstairs and
I'm not allowed to disturb the grown-ups during their nap time (until two-thirty),
you'll have to make do with a letter in pencil.
I'm terribly busy at the moment, and strange as it may sound, I don't have enough
time to get through my pile of work. Shall I tell you briefly what I've got to do? Well
then, before tomorrow I have to finish reading the first volume of a biography of
Galileo Galilei, since it has to be returned to the library. I started reading it yesterday
and have gotten up to page 220 out of 320 pages, so I'll manage it. Next week I have
to read Palestine at the Cross- roads and the second volume of Galilei. Besides that,
I finished the first volume of a biography of Emperor Charles V yesterday, and I still
have to work out the many genealogical charts I've collected and the notes I've taken.
Next I have three pages of foreign words from my various books, all of which have to
be written down, memorized and read aloud. Number four: my movie stars are in a
terrible disarray and are dying to be straightened out, but since it'll take several days
to do that and Professor Anne is, as she's already said, up to her ears in work, they'll
have to put up with the chaos a while longer. Then there're Theseus, Oedipus, Peleus,
Orpheus, Jason and Hercules all waiting to be untangled, since their various deeds are
running crisscross through my mind like mul- ticolored threads in a dress. Myron and
Phidias are also urgently in need of attention, or else I'll forget entirely how they fit
into the picture. The same applies, for example, to the Seven Years' War and the Nine
Years' War. Now I'm getting everything all mixed up. Well, what can you do with a
memory like mine! Just imagine how forgetful I'll be when I'm eighty!
Oh, one more thing. The Bible. How long is it going to take before I come to the
story of the bathing Susanna? And what do they mean by Sodom and Gomorrah? Oh,
there's still so much to find out and learn. And in the meantime, I've left Charlotte of
the Palatine in the lurch.
You can see, can't you, Kitty, that I'm full to bursting?
And now something else. You've known for a long time that my greatest wish is to be
a journalist, and later on, a famous writer. We'll have to wait and see if these grand
illusions (or delusions!) will ever come true, but up to now I've had no lack of topics.
In any case, after the war I'd like to publish a book called The Secret Annex. It
remains to be seen whether I'll succeed, but my diary can serve as the basis.
I also need to finish "Cady's Life." I've thought up the rest of the plot. After being
cured in the sanatorium, Cady goes back home and continues writing to Hans. It's
1941, and it doesn't take her long to discover Hans's Nazi sympathies, and since Cady
is deeply concerned with the plight of the Jews and of her friend Marianne, they begin
drifting apart. They meet and get back together, but break up when Hans takes up
with another girl. Cady is shattered, and because she wants to have a good job, she
studies nursing. After graduation she accepts a position, at the urging of her father's
friends, as a nurse in a TB sanatorium in Switzerland. During her first vacation she
goes to Lake Como, where she runs into Hans. He tells her that two years earlier
he'd married Cady's successor, but that his wife took her life in a fit of depression.
Now that he's seen his little Cady again, he realizes how much he loves her, and once
more asks for her hand in marriage. Cady refuses, even though, in spite of herself,
she loves him as much as ever. But her pride holds her back. Hans goes away, and
years later Cady learns that he's wound up in England, where he's struggling with ill
health.
When she's twenty-seven, Cady marries a well-to-do man from the country, named
Simon. She grows to love him, but not as much as Hans. She has two daughters and a
son, Lthan, Judith and Nico. She and Simon are happy together, but Hans is always in
the back of her mind until one night she dreams of him and says farewell.
. . .
It's not sentimental nonsense: it's based on the story of Father's life.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
SATURDAY, MAY 13, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
Yesterday was Father's birthday, Father and Mother's nineteenth wedding anniversary,
a day without the cleaning lady. . . and the sun was shining as it's never shone before
in 1944. Our chestnut tree is in full bloom. It's covered with leaves and is even more
beautiful than last year.
Father received a biography of Linnaeus from Mr. Kleiman, a book on nature from Mr.
Kugler, The Canals of Amsterdam from Dussel, a huge box from the van Daans
(wrapped so beautifully it might have been done by a professional), containing three
eggs, a bottle of beer, a jar of yogurt and a green tie. It made our jar of molasses
seem rather paltry. My roses smelled wonderful compared to Miep and Bep's red
carnations. He was thoroughly spoiled. Fifty petits fours arrived from Siemons'
Bakery, delicious! Father also treated us to spice cake, the men to beer and the ladies
to yogurt. Everything was scrumptious!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
TUESDAY, MAY 16, 1944
My dearest Kitty, just for a change (since we haven't had one of these in so long) I'll
recount a little discussion between Mr. and Mrs. van D. last night:
Mrs. van D.: "The Germans have had plenty of time to fortify the Atlantic Wall, and
they'll certainly do everything within their power to hold back the British. It's amazing
how strong the Germans are!"
Mr. van D.: "Oh, yes, amazing.
Mrs. van D.: "It is!"
Mr. van D.: "They are so strong they're bound to win the war in the end, is that what
you mean?"
Mrs. van D.: "They might. I'm not convinced that they won't."
Mr. van D.: "I won't even answer that."
Mrs. van D.: "You always wind up answering. You let yourself get carried away, every
single time."
Mr. van D.: "No, I don't. I always keep my answers to the bare minimum."
Mrs. van D.: "But you always do have an answer and you always have to be right!
Your predictions hardly ever come true, you know!"
Mr. van D.: "So far they have."
Mrs. van D.: "No they haven't. You said the invasion was going to start last year, the
Finns were supposed to have been out of the war by now, the Italian campaign ought
to have been over by last winter, and the Russians should already have captured
Lemberg. Oh no, I don't set much store by your predictions."
Mr. van D. (leaping to his feet): "Why don't you shut your trap for a change? I'll
show you who's right; someday you'll get tired of needling me. I can't stand your
bellyaching a minute longer. just wait, one day I'll make you eat your words!" (End of
Act One.)
Actually, I couldn't help giggling. Mother couldn't either, and even Peter was biting his
lips to keep from laughing. Oh, those stupid grown-ups. They need to learn a few
things first before they start making so many remarks about the younger generation!
Since Friday we've been keeping the windows open again at night.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
What Our Annex Family Is Interested In
(A Systematic Survey of Courses and Readina Matter)
Mr. van Daan. No courses; looks up many things in Knaur's Encyclopedia and Lexicon;
likes to read detective stories, medical books and love stories, exciting or trivial.
Mrs. van Daan. A correspondence course in English; likes to read biographical novels
and occasionally other kinds of novels.
Mr. Frank. Is learning English (Dickens!) and a bit of Latin; never reads novels, but
likes serious, rather dry descriptions of people and places.
Mrs. Frank. A correspondence course in English; reads everything except detective
stories.
Mr. Dussel. Is learning English, Spanish and Dutch with no noticeable results; reads
everything; goes along with the opinion of the majority.
Peter van Daan. Is learning English, French (correspondence course), shorthand in
Dutch, English and German, commercial correspondence in English, woodworking,
economics and sometimes math; seldom reads, sometimes geography.
Margot Frank. Correspondence courses in English, French and Latin, shorthand in
English, German and Dutch, trigonometry, solid geometry, mechanics, phys- ics,
chemistry, algebra, geometry, English literature, French literature, German literature,
Dutch literature, bookkeeping, geography, modern history, biology, economics; reads
everything, preferably on religion and medicine.
Anne Frank. Shorthand in French, English, German and Dutch, geometry, algebra,
history, geography, art history, mythology, biology, Bible history, Dutch literature; likes
to read biographies, dull or exciting, and history books (sometimes novels and light
reading).
FRIDAY, MAY 19, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
I felt rotten yesterday. Vomiting (and that from Anne!), headache, stomachache and
anything else you can imagine. I'm feeling better today. I'm famished, but I think I'll
skip the brown beans we're having for dinner.
Everything's going fine between Peter and me. The poor boy has an even greater need
for tenderness than I do. He still blushes every evening when he gets his good-night
kiss, and then begs for another one. Am I merely a better substitute for Boche? I
don't mind. He's so happy just knowing somebody loves him.
After my laborious conquest, I've distanced myself a little from the situation, but you
mustn't think my love has cooled. Peter's a sweetheart, but I've slammed the door to
my inner self; if he ever wants to force the lock again, he'll have to use a harder
crowbar!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
SATURDAY, MAY 20, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Last night when I came down from the attic, I noticed, the moment I entered the
room, that the lovely vase of carnations had fallen over. Mother was down on her
hands and knees mopping up the water and Margot was fishing my papers off the
floor. "What happened?" I asked with anxious foreboding, and before they could reply,
I assessed the damage from across the room. My entire genealogy file, my notebooks,
my books, everything was afloat. I nearly cried, and I was so upset I started speaking
German. I can't remember a word, but according to Margot I babbled something about
"unlioersehbarer Schaden, schrecklich, entsetzlich, nie zu ersetzen"* [* Incalculable
loss, terrible, awful, irreplaceable.] and much more. Fadier burst out laughing and
Modier and Margot joined in, but I felt like crying because all my work and elaborate
notes were lost.
I took a closer look and, luckily, die "incalculable loss" wasn't as bad as I'd expected.
Up in die attic I carefully peeled apart die sheets of paper diat were stuck togedier
and dien hung diem on die clodiesline to dry. It was such a funny sight, even I had to
laugh. Maria de' Medici alongside Charles V, William of Orange and Marie Antoinette.
"It's Rassenschande,"* Mr. van Daan joked. [An affront to racial purity.]
After entrusting my papers to Peter's care, I went back downstairs.
"Which books are ruined?" I asked Margot, who was going dirough them.
"Algebra," Margot said.
But as luck would have it, my algebra book wasn't entirely ruined. I wish it had fallen
right in the vase. I've never loathed any book as much as that one. Inside the front
cover are the names of at least twenty girls who had it before I did. It's old,
yellowed, full of scribbles, crossed-out words and revisions. The next time I'm in a
wicked mood, I'm going to tear the darned thing to pieces!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
MONDAY, MAY 22,1944
Dearest Kitty,
On May 20, Father lost his bet and had to give five jars of yogurt to Mrs. van Daan:
the invasion still hasn't begun. I can safely say that all of Amsterdam, all of Holland,
in fact the entire western coast of Europe, all the way down to Spain, are talking
about the invasion day and night, debating, making bets and . . . hoping.
The suspense is rising to fever pitch; by no means has everyone we think of as
"good" Dutch people kept their faith in the English, not everyone thinks the English
bluff is a masterful strategical move. Oh no, people want deeds-great, heroic deeds.
No one can see farther than the end of their nose, no one gives a thought to the fact
that the British are fighting for their own country and their own people; everyone
thinks it's England's duty to save Holland, as quickly as possible. What obligations do
the English have toward us? What have the Dutch done to deserve the generous help
they so clearly expect? Oh no, the Dutch are very much mistaken. The English,
despite their bluff, are certainly no more to blame for the war than all the other
countries, large and small, that are now occupied by the Germans. The British are not
about to offer their excuses; true, they were sleeping during the years Germany was
rearming itself, but all the other countries, especially those bordering on Germany,
were asleep too. England and the rest of the world have discovered that burying your
head in the sand doesn't work, and now each of them, especially England, is having to
pay a heavy price for its ostrich policy.
No country sacrifices its men without reason, and certainly not in the interests of
another, and England is no exception. The invasion, liberation and freedom will come
someday; yet England, not the occupied territories, will choose the moment.
To our great sorrow and dismay, we've heard that many people have changed their
attitude toward us Jews. We've been told that anti-Semitism has cropped up in circles
where once it would have been unthinkable. This fact has affected us all very, very
deeply. The reason for the hatred is understandable, maybe even human, but that
doesn't make it right. According to the Christians, the Jews are blabbing their secrets
to the Germans, denouncing their helpers and causing them to suffer the dreadful fate
and punishments that have already been meted out to so many. All of this is true. But
as with everything, they should look at the matter from both sides: would Christians
act any differently if they were in our place? Could anyone, regardless of whether
they're Jews or Christians, remain silent in the face of German pressure? Everyone
knows it's practically impossible, so why do they ask the impossible of the Jews?
It's being said in underground circles that the German Jews who immigrated to Holland
before the war and have now been sent to Poland shouldn't be allowed to return here.
They were granted the right to asylum in Holland, but once Hitler is gone, they should
go back to Germany.
When you hear that, you begin to wonder why we're fighting this long and difficult
war. We're always being told that we're fighting for freedom, truth and justice! The
war isn't even over, and already there's dissension and Jews are regarded as lesser
beings. Oh, it's sad, very sad that the old adage has been confirmed for the umpteenth
time: "What one Christian does is his own responsibthty, what one Jew does reflects
on all Jews."
To be honest, I can't understand how the Dutch, a nation of good, honest, upright
people, can sit in judgment on us the way they do. On us-the most oppressed,
unfortunate and pitiable people in all the world.
I have only one hope: that this anti-Semitism is just a passing thing, that the Dutch
will show their true colors, that they'll never waver from what they know in their
hearts to be just, for this is unjust!
And if they ever carry out this terrible threat, the meager handful of Jews still left in
Holland will have to go. We too will have to shoulder our bundles and move on, away
from this beautiful country, which once so kindly took us in and now turns its back on
us.
I love Holland. Once I hoped it would become a fatherland to me, since I had lost my
own. And I hope so still!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
THURSDAY, MAY 25, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Bep's engaged! The news isn't much of a surprise, though none of us are particularly
pleased. Bertus may be a nice, steady, athletic young man, but Bep doesn't love him,
and to me that's enough reason to advise her against marrying him.
Bep's trying to get ahead in the world, and Bertus is pulling her back; he's a laborer,
without any interests or any desire to make something of himself, and I don't think
that'll make Bep happy. I can understand Bep's wanting to put an end to her
indecision; four weeks ago she decided to write him off, but then she felt even worse.
So she wrote him a letter, and now she's engaged.
There are several factors involved in this engagement. First, Bep's sick father, who
likes Bertus very much. Second, she's the oldest of the Voskuijl girls and her mother
teases her about being an old maid. Third, she's just turned twenty-four, and that
matters a great deal to Bep.
Mother said it would have been better if Bep had simply had an affair with Bertus. I
don't know, I feel sorry for Bep and can understand her loneliness. In any case, they
can get married only after the war, since Bertus is in hiding, or at any rate has gone
underground. Besides, they don't have a penny to their name and nothing in the way
of a hope chest. What a sorry prospect for Bep, for whom we all wish the best. I
only hope Bertus improves under her influence, or that Bep finds another man, one
who knows how to appreciate her!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
THE SAME DAY
There's something happening every day. This morning Mr. van Hoeven was arrested.
He was hiding two Jews in his house. It's a heavy blow for us, not only because
those poor Jews are once again balancing on the edge of an abyss, but also because
it's terrible for Mr. van Hoeven.
The world's been turned upside down. The most decent people are being sent to
concentration camps, prisons and lonely cells, while the lowest of the low rule over
young and old, rich and poor. One gets caught for black marketeering, another for
hiding Jews or other un- fortunate souls. Unless you're a Nazi, you don't know what's
going to happen to you from one day to the next.
Mr. van Hoeven is a great loss to us too. Bep can't possibly lug such huge amounts of
potatoes all the way here, nor should she have to, so our only choice is to eat fewer
of them. I'll tell you what we have in mind, but it's certainly not going to make life
here any more agreeable. Mother says we'll skip breakfast, eat hot cereal and bread
for lunch and fried potatoes for dinner and, if possible, vegetables or lettuce once or
twice a week. That's all there is. We're going to be hungry, but nothing's worse than
being caught.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
FRIDAY, MAY 26, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
At long, long last, I can sit quietly at my table before the crack in the window frame
and write you everything, everything I want to say.
I feel more miserable than I have in months. Even after the break-in I didn't feel so
utterly broken, inside and out. On the one hand, there's the news about Mr. van
Hoeven, the Jewish question (which is discussed in detail by everyone in the house),
the invasion (which is so long in coming), the awful food, the tension, the miserable atmosphere, my disappointment in Peter. On the other hand, there's Bep's
engagement, the Pentecost reception, the flowers, Mr. Kugler's birthday, cakes and
stories about cabarets, movies and concerts. That gap, that enormous gap, is always
there. One day we're laugh- ing at the comical side of life in hiding, and the next day
(and there are many such days), we're frightened, and the fear, tension and despair
can be read on our faces.
Miep and Mr. Kugler bear the greatest burden for us, and for all those in hiding-Miep
in everything she does and Mr. Kugler through his enormous responsibthty for the
eight of us, which is sometimes so overwhelming that he can hardly speak from the
pent-up tension and strain. Mr. Kleiman and Bep also take very good care of us, but
they're able to put the Annex out of their minds, even if it's only for a few hours or
a few days. They have their own worries, Mr. Kleiman with his health and Bep with
her engagement, which isn't looking very promising lat the moment. But they also have
their outings, their visits with friends, their everyday lives as ordinary people, so that
the tension is sometimes relieved, if only for a short while, while ours never is, never
has been, not once in the two years we've been here. How much longer will this
increasingly oppressive, unbearable weight press I down on us?
The drains are clogged again. We can't run the wa- ter, or if we do, only a trickle;
we can't flush the toilet, so we have to use a toilet brush; and we've been putting our
dirty water into a big earthenware jar. We can man- age for today, but what will
happen if the plumber can't fix it on his own? The Sanitation Department can't come
until Tuesday.
Miep sent us a raisin bread with "Happy Pentecost" written on top. It's almost as if
she were mocking us, since our moods and cares are far from "happy."
We've all become more frightened since the van Hoeven business. Once again you hear
"shh" from all I sides, and we're doing everything more quietly. The police forced the
door there; they could just as easily do that here too! What will we do if we're ever.
. . no, I mustn't write that down. But the question won't let itself be pushed to the
back of my mind today; on the contrary, all the fear I've ever felt is looming before
me in all its horror.
I had to go downstairs alone at eight this evening to use the bathroom. There was no
one down there, since they were all listening to the radio. I wanted to be brave, but it
was hard. I always feel safer upstairs than in that huge, silent house; when I'm alone
with those mysterious muffied sounds from upstairs and the honking of horns in the
street, I have to hurry and remind myself where I am to keep from getting the
shivers.
Miep has been acting much nicer toward us since her talk with Father. But I haven't
told you about that yet. Miep came up one afternoon all flushed and asked Father
straight out if we thought they too were infected with the current anti-Semitism.
Father was stunned and quickly talked her out of the idea, but some of Miep's
suspicion has lingered on. They're doing more errands for us now and showing more
of an interest in our troubles, though we certainly shouldn't bother them with our
woes. Oh, they're such good, noble people!
I've asked myself again and again whether it wouldn't have been better if we hadn't
gone into hiding, if we were dead now and didn't have to go through this misery,
especially so that the others could be spared the burden. But we all shrink from this
thought. We still love life, we haven't yet forgotten the voice of nature, and we keep
hoping, hoping for. . . everything.
Let something happen soon, even an air raid. Nothing can be more crushing than this
anxiety. Let the end come, however cruel; at least then we'll know whether we are to
be the victors or the vanquished.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
WEDNESDAY, MAY 31, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Saturday, Sunday, Monday and Tuesday it was too hot to hold my fountain pen, which
is why I couldn't write to you. Friday the drains were clogged, Saturday they were
fixed. Mrs. Kleiman came for a visit in the afternoon and told us a lot about Jopiej
she and Jacque van Maarsen are in the same hockey club. Sunday Bep dropped by to
make sure there hadn't been a break-in and stayed for breakfast. Monday (a holiday
because of Pentecost), Mr. Gies served as the Annex watchman, and Tuesday we
were finally allowed to open the windows. We've seldom had a Pentecost weekend that
was so beautiful and warm. Or maybe "hot" is a better word. Hot weather is horrible
in the Annex. To give you an idea of the numerous complaints, I'll briefly describe
these sweltering days.
Saturday: "Wonderful, what fantastic weather," we all said in the morning. "If only it
weren't quite so hot," we said in the afternoon, when the windows had to be shut.
Sunday: "The heat's unbearable, the butter's melt- ing, there's not a cool spot
anywhere in the house, the bread's drying out, the milk's going sour, the windows
can't be opened. We poor outcasts are suffocating while everyone else is enjoying
their Pentecost." (According to Mrs. van D.)
Monday: "My feet hurt, I have nothing cool to wear, I can't do the dishes in this
heat!" Grumbling from early in the morning to late at night. It was awful.
I can't stand the heat. I'm glad the wind's come up today, but that the sun's still
shining.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
FRIDAY, JUNE 2, 1944 J
Dear Kitty,
"If you're going to the attic, take an umbrella with you, preferably a large one!" This
is to protect you from "household showers." There's a Dutch proverb: "High and dry,
safe and sound," but it obviously doesn't apply to wartime (guns!) and to people in
hiding (cat box!). Mouschi's gotten into the habit of relieving herself on some
newspapers or between the cracks in the floor boards, so we have good reason to fear
the splatters and, even worse, the stench. The new Moortje in the warehouse has the
same problem. Anyone who's ever had a cat that's not housebroken can imagine the
smells, other than pepper and thyme, that permeate this house.
I also have a brand-new prescription for gunfire jitters: When the shooting gets loud,
proceed to the nearest wooden staircase. Run up and down a few times, making sure
to stumble at least once. What with the scratches and the noise of running and falling,
you won't even be able to hear the shooting, much less worry about it. Yours truly
has put this magic formula to use, with great success!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
MONDAY, JUNE 5, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
New problems in the Annex. A quarrel between Dussel and the Franks over the
division of butter. Capitulation on the part of Dussel. Close friendship between the
latter and Mrs. van Daan, flirtations, kisses and friendly little smiles. Dussel is
beginning to long for female companionship.
The van Daans don't see why we should bake a spice cake for Mr. Kugler's birthday
when we can't have one ourselves. All very petty. Mood upstairs: bad. Mrs. van D.
has a cold. Dussel caught with brewer's yeast tablets, while we've got none.
The Fifth Army has taken Rome. The city neither destroyed nor bombed. Great
propaganda for Hitler.
Very few potatoes and vegetables. One loaf of bread was moldy.
Scharminkeltje (name of new warehouse cat) can't stand pepper. She sleeps in the cat
box and does her business in the wood shavings. Impossible to keep her.
Bad weather. Continuous bombing of Pas de Calais and the west coast of France.
No one buying dollars. Gold even less interesting.
The bottom of our black moneybox is in sight. What are we going to live on next
month?
Yours, Anne M. Frank
TUESDAY, JUNE 6, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
"This is D Day," the BBC announced at twelve.
"This is the day." The invasion has begun!
This morning at eight the British reported heavy bombing of Calais, Boulogne, Le
Havre and Cherbourg, as well as Pas de Calais (as usual). Further, as a precautionary
measure for those in the occupied territories, everyone living within a zone of twenty
miles from the coast was warned to prepare for bombardments. Where possible, the
British will drop pamphlets an hour ahead of time.
According to the German news, British paratroopers have landed on the coast of
France. "British landing craft are engaged in combat with German naval units,"
according to the BBC.
Conclusion reached by the Annex while breakfasting at nine: this is a trial landing, like
the one two years ago in Dieppe.
BBC broadcast in German, Dutch, French and other languages at ten: The invasion has
begun! So this is the "real" invasion. BBC broadcast in German at eleven: speech by
Supreme Commander General Dwight Eisenhower.
BBC broadcast in English: "This is 0 Day." General Eisenhower said to the French
people: "Stiff fighting will come now, but after this the victory. The year 1944 is the
year of complete victory. Good luck!"
BBC broadcast in English at one: 11,000 planes are shuttling back and forth or
standing by to land troops and bomb behind enemy lines; 4,000 landing craft and small
boats are continually arriving in the area between Cher- bourg and Le Havre. English
and American troops are already engaged in heavy combat. Speeches by Gerbrandy,
the Prime Minister of Belgium, King Haakon of Norway, de Gaulle of France, the King
of England and, last but not least, Churchill.
A huge commotion in the Annex! Is this really the beginning of the long-awaited
liberation? The liberation we've all talked so much about, which still seems too good,
too much of a fairy tale ever to come true? Will this year, 1944, bring us victory? We
don't know yet. But where there's hope, there's life. It fills us with fresh courage and
makes us strong again. We'll need to be brave to endure the many fears and hardships
and the suffering yet to come. It's now a matter of remaining calm and steadfast, of
gritting our teeth and keeping a stiff upper lip! France, Russia, Italy, and even
Germany, can cry out in agony, but we don't yet have that right!
Oh, Kitty, the best part about the invasion is that I have the feeling that friends are
on the way. Those terrible Germans have oppressed and threatened us for so long that
the thought of friends and salvation means everything to us! Now it's not just the
Jews, but Holland and all of occupied Europe. Maybe, Margot says, I can even go back
to school in October or September.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
P.S. I'll keep you informed of the latest news!
This morning and last night, dummies made of straw and rubber were dropped from
the air behind German lines, and they exploded the minute they hit the ground. Many
paratroopers, their faces blackened so they couldn't be seen in the dark, landed as
well. The French coast was bombarded with 5,500 tons of bombs during the night, and
then, at six in the morning, the first landing craft came ashore. Today there were
20,000 airplanes in action. The German coastal batteries were destroyed even before
the landing; a small bridgehead has already been formed. Everything's going well,
despite the bad weather. The army and the people are "one will and one hope."
FRIDAY, JUNE 9, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Great news of the invasion! The Allies have taken Bayeux, a village on the coast of
France, and are now fighting for Caen. They're clearly intending to cut off the
peninsula where Cherbourg is located. Every evening the war correspondents report on
the difficulties, the courage and the fighting spirit of the army. To get their stories,
they pull off the most amazing feats. A few of the wounded who are already back in
England also spoke on the radio. Despite the miserable weather, the planes are flying
dthgently back and forth. We heard over the BBC that Churchill wanted to land along
with the troops on D Day, but Eisenhower and the other generals managed to talk him
out of it. Just imagine, so much courage for such an old man he must be at least
seventy!
The excitement here has died down somewhat; still, we're all hoping that the war will
finally be over by the end of the year. It's about time! Mrs. van Daan's constant
griping is unbearable; now that she can no longer drive us crazy with the invasion, she
moans and groans all day about the bad weather. If only we could plunk her down in
the loft in a bucket of cold water!
Everyone in the Annex except Mr. van Daan and Peter has read the Hunaarian
Rhapsody trilogy, a biography of the composer, piano virtuoso and child prodigy Franz
Liszt. It's very interesting, though in my opinion there's a bit too much emphasis on
women; Liszt was not only the greatest and most famous pianist of his time, he was
also the biggest womanizer, even at the age of seventy. He had an affair with
Countess Marie d' Agoult, Princess Carolyne Sayn- Wittgenstein, the dancer Lola
Montez, the pianist Agnes Kingworth, the pianist Sophie Menter, the Circassian
princess Olga Janina, Baroness Olga Meyen- dorff, actress Lilla what's-her-name,
etc., etc., and there's no end to it. Those parts of the book dealing with music and the
other arts are much more interesting. Some of the people mentioned are Schumann,
Clara Wieck, Hector Berlioz, Johannes Brahms, Beethoven, Joachim, Richard Wagner,
Hans von Bulow, Anton Rubinstein, Frederic Chopin, Victor Hugo, Honore de Balzac,
Hiller, Hummel, Czerny, Rossini, Cherubini, Paganini, Mendels- sohn, etc., etc.
Liszt appears to have been a decent man, very generous and modest, though
exceptionally vain. He helped others, put art above all else, was extremely fond of
cognac and women, couldn't bear the sight of tears, was a gentleman, couldn't refuse
anyone a favor, wasn't interested in money and cared about religious freedom and the
world.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
314 ANNE FRANK
TUESDAY, JUNE 13, 1944
Dearest Kit,
Another birthday has gone by, so I'm now fifteen. I received quite a few gifts:
Springer's five-volume art history book, a set of underwear, two belts, a handkerchief,
two jars of yogurt, a jar of jam, two honey cookies (small), a botany book from
Father and Mother, a gold bracelet from Margot, a sticker album from the van Daans,
Biomalt and sweet peas from Dussel, candy from Miep, candy and notebooks from Bep,
and the high point: the book Maria Theresa and three slices of full-cream cheese
from Mr. Kugler. Peter gave me a lovely bouquet of peonies; the poor boy had put a
lot of effort into finding a present, but nothing quite worked out.
The invasion is still going splendidly, in spite of the miserable weather -- pouring
rains, gale winds and high seas.
Yesterday Churchill, Smuts, Eisenhower and Arnold visited the French villages that the
British have captured and liberated. Churchill was on a torpedo boat that shelled the
coast. Uke many men, he doesn't seem to know what fear is -- an enviable trait!
From our position here in Fort Annex, it's difficult to gauge the mood of the Dutch.
No doubt many people are glad the idle (!) British have finally rolled up their sleeves
and gotten down to work. Those who keep claim- ing they don't want to be occupied
by the British don't realize how unfair they're being. Their line of reasoning boils
down to this: England must fight, struggle and sacri- fice its sons to liberate Holland
and the other occupied countries. After that the British shouldn't remain in Hol- land:
they should offer their most abject apologies to all the occupied countries, restore the
Dutch East Indies to its rightful owner and then return, weakened and impoverished, to
England. What a bunch of idiots. And yet, as I've already said, many Dutch people can
be counted among their ranks. What would have become of Holland and its neighbors if
England had signed a peace treaty with Germany, as it's had ample opportunity to do?
Holland would have become German, and that would have been the end of that!
All those Dutch people who still look down on the British, scoff at England and its
government of old fogies, call the English cowards, yet hate the Germans, should be
given a good shaking, the way you'd plump up a pillow. Maybe that would straighten
out their jumbled brains!
Wishes, thoughts, accusations and reproaches are swirling around in my head. I'm not
really as conceited as many people think; I know my various faults and shortcomings
better than anyone else, but there's one difference: I also know that I want to change,
will change and already have changed greatly!
Why is it, I often ask myself, that everyone still thinks I'm so pushy and such a
know-it-all? Am I really so arrogant? Am I the one who's so arrogant, or are they?
It sounds crazy, I know, but I'm not going to cross out that last sentence, because it's
not as crazy as it seems. Mrs. van Daan and Dussel, my two chief accusers, are
known to be totally unintelligent and, not to put too fine a point on it, just plain
"stupid"! Stupid people usually can't bear it when others do something better than they
do; the best examples of this are those two dummies, Mrs. van Daan and Dussel. Mrs.
van D. thinks I'm stupid because I don't suffer so much from this ailment as she does,
she thinks I'm pushy because she's even pushier, she thinks my dresses are too short
because hers are even shorter, and she thinks I'm such a know-it-all because she
talks twice as much as I do about topics she knows nothing about. The same goes for
Dussel. But one of my favorite sayings is "Where there's smoke there's fire," and I
readily admit I'm a know-it-all.
What's so difficult about my personality is that I scold and curse myself much more
than anyone else does; if Mother adds her advice, the pile of sermons becomes so
thick that I despair of ever getting through them. Then I talk back and start
contradicting everyone until the old famthar Anne refrain inevitably crops up again:
"No one understands me!"
This phrase is part of me, and as unlikely as it may seem, there's a kernel of truth in
it. Sometimes I'm so deeply buried under self-reproaches that I long for a word of
comfort to help me dig myself out again. If only I had someone who took my feelings
seriously. Alas, I haven't yet found that person, so the search must go on.
I know you're wondering about Peter, aren't you, Kit? It's true, Peter loves me, not as
a girlfriend, but as a friend. His affection grows day by day, but some mysterious
force is holding us back, and I don't know what it is.
Sometimes I think my terrible longing for him was overexaggerated. But that's not
true, because if I'm unable to go to his room for a day or two, I long for him as
desperately as I ever did. Peter is kind and good, and yet I can't deny that he's
disappointed me in many ways. I especially don't care for his dislike of religion, his
table conversations and various things of that nature. Still, I'm firmly convinced that
we'll stick to our agreement never to quarrel. Peter is peace-loving, tolerant and
extremely easygoing. He lets me say a lot of things to him that he'd never accept
from his mother. He's making a determined effort to remove the blots from his
copybook and keep his affairs in order. Yet why does he hide his innermost self and
never allow me access? Of course, he's much more closed than I am, but I know from
experience (even though I'm constantly being accused of knowing all there is to know
in theory, but not in practice) that in time, even the most uncommunicative types will
long as much, or even more, for someone to confide in.
Peter and I have both spent our contemplative years in the Annex. We often discuss
the future, the past and the present, but as I've already told you, I miss the real
thing, and yet I know it exists!
Is it because I haven't been outdoors for so long that I've become so smitten with
nature? I remember a time when a magnificent blue sky, chirping birds, moonlight and
budding blossoms wouldn't have captivated me. Things have changed since I came
here. One night during the Pentecost holiday, for instance, when it was so hot, I
struggled to keep my eyes open until eleven-thirty so I could get a good look at the
moon, all on my own for once. Alas, my sacrifice was in vain, since there was too
much glare and I couldn't risk opening a window. An- other time, several months ago,
I happened to be upstairs one night when the window was open. I didn't go back down
until it had to be closed again. The dark, rainy evening, the wind, the racing clouds,
had me spellbound; it was the first time in a year and a half that I'd seen the night
face-to-face. After that evening my longing to see it again was even greater than my
fear of burglars, a dark rat-infested house or robberies. I went downstairs all by
myself and looked out the windows in the kitchen and private office. Many people
think nature is beautiful, many people sleep from time to time under the starry sky,
and many people in hospitals and prisons long for the day when they'll be free to
enjoy what nature has to offer. But few are as isolated and cut off as we are from
dle joys of nature, which can be shared by rich and poor alike.
It's not just my imagination -- looking at dle sky, dle clouds, dle moon and dle stars
really does make me feel calm and hopeful. It's much better medicine than valerian or
bromide. Nature makes me feel humble and ready to face every blow with courage!
As luck would have it, I'm only able -- except for a few rare occasions-to view
nature through dusty curtains tacked over dirt-caked windows; it takes dle pleasure
out of looking. Nature is dle one thing for which dlere is no substitute!
One of dle many questions that have often bodlered me is why women have been, and
still are, thought to be so inferior to men. It's easy to say it's unfair, but that's not
enough for me; I'd really like to know the reason for this great injustice!
Men presumably dominated women from the very beginning because of their greater
physical strength; it's men who earn a living, beget children and do as they please. . .
Until recently, women silently went along willi this, which was stupid, since the longer
it's kept up, the more deeply entrenched it becomes. Fortunately, education, work and
progress have opened women's eyes. In many countries they've been granted equal
rights; many people, mainly women, but also men, now realize how wrong it was to
tolerate this state of affairs for so long. Modern women want the right to be
completely independent!
But that's not all. Women should be respected as well! Generally speaking, men are
held in great esteem in all parts ofthe world, so why shouldn't women have their
share? Soldiers and war heroes are honored and commemorated, explorers are granted
immortal fame, martyrs are revered, but how many people look upon women too as
soldiers?
In the book Soldiers on the Home Front I was greatly struck by the fact that in
childbirth alone, women commonly suffer more pain, illness and misery than any war
hero ever does. And what's her reward for enduring all that pain? She gets pushed
aside when she's disfigured by birth, her children soon leave, her beauty is gone.
Women, who struggle and suffer pain to ensure the con- tinuation of the human race,
make much tougher and more courageous soldiers than all those big-mouthed
freedom-fighting heroes put together!
I don't mean to imply that women should stop having children; on the contrary, nature
intended them to, and that's the way it should be. What I condemn are our system of
values and the men who don't acknowledge how great, difficult, but ultimately beautiful
women's share in society is.
I agree completely with Paul de Kruif, the author of this book, when he says that men
must learn that birth is no longer thought of as inevitable and unavoidable in those
parts of the world we consider civthzed. It's easy for men to talk -- they don't and
never will have to bear the woes that women do!
I believe that in the course of the next century the notion that it's a woman's duty to
have children will change and make way for the respect and admiration of all women,
who bear their burdens without complaint or a lot of pompous words!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
FRIDAY, JUNE 16, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
New problems: Mrs. van D. is at her wit's end. She's talking about getting shot, being
thrown in prison, being hanged and suicide. She's jealous that Peter confides in me and
not in her, offended that Dussel doesn't re- spond sufficiently to her flirtations and
afraid her husband's going to squander all the fur-coat money on to- bacco. She
quarrels, curses, cries, feels sorry for herself, laughs and starts allover again.
What on earth can you do with such a silly, sniveling specimen of humanity? Nobody
takes her seriously, she has no strength of character, she complains to one and all,
and you should see how she walks around: von hinten Lyzeum, yon vorne Museum.*
[Acts like a schoolgirl, looks like a frump.] Even worse, Peter's becoming insolent,
Mr. van Daan irritable and Mother cynical. Yes, everyone's in quite a state! There's
only one rule you need to remember: laugh at everything and forget everybody else! It
sounds egotistical, but it's actually the only cure for those suffering from self-pity.
Mr. Kugler's supposed to spend four weeks in Alkmaar on a work detail. He's trying
to get out of it with a doctor's certificate and a letter from Opekta. Mr. Kleiman's
hoping his stomach will be operated on soon. Starting at eleven last night, all private
phones were cut off.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
FRIDAY, JUNE 23, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Nothing special going on here. The British have begun their all-out attack on
Cherbourg. According to Pim and Mr. van Oaan, we're sure to be liberated before
October 10. The Russians are taking part in the cam- paign; yesterday they started
their offensive near Vitebsk, exactly three years to the day that the Germans invaded
Russia.
Bep's spirits have sunk lower than ever. We're nearly out of potatoes; from now on,
we're going to count them out for each person, then everyone can do what they want
with them. Starting Monday, Miep's taking a week of vacation. Mr. Kleiman's doctors
haven't found anything on the X rays. He's torn between having an operation and
letting matters take their course.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
TUESDAY, JUNE 27, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
The mood has changed, everything's going enormously well. Cherbourg, Vitebsk and
Zhlobin fell today. They're sure to have captured lots of men and equipment. Five
German generals were killed near Cherbourg and two taken captive. Now that they've
got a harbor, the British can bring whatever they want on shore. The whole Cotentin
Peninsula has been captured just three weeks after the invasion! What a feat!
In the three weeks since D Day there hasn't been a day without rain and storms,
neither here nor in France, but this bad luck hasn't kept the British and the Americans
from displaying their might. And how! Of course, the Germans have launched their
wonder weapon, but a little firecracker like that won't hardly make a dent, except
maybe minor damage in England and screaming headlines in the Kraut newspapers.
Anyway, when they realize in "Krautland" that the Bolsheviks really are getting closer,
they'll be shaking in their boots.
All German women who aren't working for the military are being evacuated, together
with their children, from the coastal regions to the provinces of Groningen, Friesland
and Gelderland. Mussert* [* The leader of the Dutch National Socialist (Nazi) Party]
has announced that if the invasion reaches Holland, he'll enlist. Is that fat pig planning
to fight? He could have done that in Russia long before now. Finland turned down a
peace offer some time ago, and now the negotiations have been broken off again.
Those numbskulls, they'll be sorry!
How far do you think we'll be on July 27?
Yours, Anne M. Frank
FRIDAY, JUNE 30, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Bad weather from one at a stretch to the thirty June* [Anne's English.] Don't I say
that well? Oh yes, I already know a little English; just to prove it I'm reading An
Ideal Husband with the help of a dictionary! War's going wonderfully: Bobruysk,
Mogilev and Orsha have fallen, lots of prisoners.
Everything's all right here. Spirits are improving, our superoptimists are triumphant,
the van Daans are doing disappearing acts with the sugar, Bep' s changed her hair, and
Miep has a week off. That's the latest news!
I've been having really ghastly root-canal work done on one of my front teeth. It's
been terribly painful. It was so bad Dussel thought I was going to faint, and I nearly
did. Mrs. van D. promptly got a toothache as well!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
P.S. We've heard from Basel that Bernd* [Cousin Bernhard (Buddy) Elias]. played the
part of the innkeeper in Minna von Barnhelm. He has "artistic leanings," says Mother.
THURSDAY, JULY 6, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
My blood runs cold when Peter talks about becoming a criminal or a speculator; of
course, he's joking, but I still have the feeling he's afraid of his own weakness.
Margot and Peter are always saying to me, "If I had your spunk and your strength, if
I had your drive and unflagging energy, could. . .
Is it really such an admirable trait not to let myself be influenced by others? Am I
right in following my own conscience?
To be honest, I can't imagine how anyone could say "I'm weak" and then stay that
way. If you know that about yourself, why not fight it, why not develop your
character? Their answer has always been: "Because it's much easier not to!" This
reply leaves me feeling rather discouraged. Easy? Does that mean a life of deceit and
laziness is easy too? Oh no, that can't be true. It can't be true that people are so
readily tempted by ease. . . and money. I've given a lot of thought to what my answer
should be, to how I should get Peter to believe in himself and, most of all, to change
himself for the better. I don't know whether I'm on the right track.
I've often imagined how nice it would be if someone were to confide everything to
me. But now that it's reached that point, I realize how difficult it is to put yourself in
someope else's shoes and find the right answer. Especially since "easy" and "money"
are new and com- pletely alien concepts to me.
Peter's beginning to lean on me and I don't want that, not under any circumstances.
It's hard enough standing on your own two feet, but when you also have to remain
true to your character and soul, it's harder still.
I've been drifting around at sea, have spent days searching for an effective antidote to
that terrible word "easy." How can I make it clear to him that, while it may seem
easy and wonderful, it will drag him down to the depths, to a place where he'll no
longer find friends, support or beauty, so far down that he may never rise to the
surface again?
We're all alive, but we don't know why or what for; we're all searching for happiness;
we're all leading lives that are different and yet the same. We three have been raised
in good famthes, we have the opportunity to get an education and make something of
ourselves. We have many reasons to hope for great happiness, but. . . we have to
earn it. And that's something you can't achieve by taking the easy way out. Earning
happiness means doing good and working, not speculating and being lazy. Laziness may
look inviting, but only work gives you true satisfaction.
I can't understand people who don't like to work, but that isn't Peter's problem either.
He just doesn't have a goal, plus he thinks he's too stupid and inferior to ever achieve
anything. Poor boy, he's never known how it feels to make someone else happy, and
I'm afraid I can't teach him. He isn't religious, scoffs at Jesus Christ and takes the
Lord's name in vain, and though I'm not Orthodox either, it hurts me every time to
see him so lonely, so scornful, so wretched.
People who are religious should be glad, since not everyone is blessed with the ability
to believe in a higher order. You don't even have to live in fear of eternal punishment;
the concepts of purgatory, heaven and hell are difficult for many people to accept, yet
religion itself, any religion, keeps a person on the right path. Not the fear of God, but
upholding your own sense of honor and obeying your own conscience. How noble and
good everyone could be if, at the end of each day, they were to review their own
behavior and weigh up the rights and wrongs. They would automatically try to do
better at the start of each new day and, after a while, would certainly accomplish a
great deal. Everyone is welcome to this prescription; it costs nothing and is definitely
useful. Those who don't know will have to find out by experience that "a quiet
conscience gives you strength!"
Yours, Anne M. Frank
SATURDAY, JULY 8, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Mr. Broks was in Beverwijk and managed to get hold of strawberries at the produce
auction. They arrived here dusty and full of sand, but in large quantities. No less than
twenty-four crates for the office and us. That very same evening we canned the first
six jars and made eight jars of jam. The next morning Miep started making jam for
the office.
At twelve-thirty the outside door was locked, crates were lugged into the kitchen,
with Peter, Father and Mr. van Daan stumbling up the stairs. Anne got hot water from
the water heater, Margot"",went for a bucket, all hands on deck! With a funny feeling
in my stomach, I entered the overcrowded office kitchen. Miep, Bep, Mr. Kleiman, Jan,
Father, Peter: the Annex contingent and the Supply Corps all mixed up together, and
that in the middle of the day! Curtains and windows open, loud voices, banging doors
-- I was trembling with excitement. I kept thinking, "Are we really in hiding?" This
must be how it feels when you can finally go out into the world again. The pan was
full, so I dashed upstairs, where the rest of the family was hulling strawberries around
the kitchen table. At least that's what they were supposed to be doing, but more was
going into their mouths than into the buckets. They were bound to need another
bucket soon. Peter went back downstairs, but then the doorbell rang twice. Leaving the
bucket where it was, Peter raced upstairs and shut the bookcase behind him. We sat
kicking our heels impatiently; the strawberries were waiting to be rinsed, but we stuck
to the house rule: "No running water when strangers are downstairs -- they might
hear the drains."
Jan came up at one to tell us it had been the mail- man. Peter hurried downstairs
again. Ding-dong. . . the doorbell, about-face. I listened to hear if anyone was
coming, standing first at the bookcase, then at the top of the stairs. Finally Peter and
I leaned over the banister, straining our ears like a couple of burglars to hear the
sounds from downstairs. No unfamthar voices. Peter tip- toed halfway down the stairs
and called out, "Bep!"
Once more: "Bep!" His voice was drowned out by the racket in the kitchen. So he ran
down to the kitchen while I nervously kept watch from above. "Go upstairs at once,
Peter, the accountant's here, you've got to leave!" It was Mr. Kugler's voice. Sighing,
Peter came upstairs and closed the bookcase.
Mr. Kugler finally came up at one-thirty. "My gosh, the whole world's turned to
strawberries. I had strawber- ries for breakfast, Jan's having diem for lunch,
Kleiman's eating them as a snack, Miep's bothng them, Bep's hulling them, and I can
smell them everywhere I go. I come upstairs to get away from all that red and what
do I see? People washing strawberries!"
The rest of the strawberries were canned. That evening: two jars came unsealed.
Father quickly turned them into jam. The next morning: two more lids popped up; and
that afternoon: four lids. Mr. van Daan hadn't gotten the jars hot enough when he was
sterthzing them, so Father ended up making jam every evening. We ate hot cereal with
strawberries, buttermilk with strawberries, bread with strawberries, strawberries for
dessert, straw- berries with sugar, strawberries with sand. For two days there was
nothing but strawberries, strawberries, strawberries, and then our supply was either
exhausted or in jars, safely under lock and key.
"Hey, Anne," Margot called out one day, "Mrs. van Hoeven has let us have some peas,
twenty pounds!"
"That's nice of her," I replied. And it certainly was, but it's so much work. . . ugh!
"On Saturday, you've aJI got to shell peas," Mother announced at the table.
And sure enough, this morning after breakfast our biggest enamel pan appeared on the
table, filled to the brim with peas. If you think shelling peas is boring work, you ought
to try removing the inner linings. I don't think many people realize that once you've
pulled out the linings, the pods are soft, delicious and rich in vitamins. But an even
greater advantage is that you get nearly three times as much as when you eat just the
peas.
Stripping pods is a precise and meticulous job that might be suited to pedantic dentists
or finicky spice experts, but it's a horror for an impatient teenager like me. We
started work at nine-thirty; I sat down at ten-thirty, got Up again at eleven, sat
down again at eleven-thirty. My ears were humming with the following refrain: snap
the end, strip the pod, pull the string, pod in the pan, snap the end, strip the pod, pull
the string, pod in the pan, etc., etc. My eyes were swimming: green, green, worm,
string, rotten pod, green, green. To fight the boredom and have something to do, I
chattered all morn- ing, saying whatever came into my head and making everyone
laugh. The monotony was killing me. Every string I pulled made me more certain that
I never, ever, want to be just a housewife!
At twelve we finally ate breakfast, but from twelve-thirty to one-fifteen we had to
strip pods again. When I stopped, I felt a bit seasick, and so did the others. I napped
until four, still in a daze because of those wretched peas.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
SATURDAY, JULY 15,1944
Dearest Kitty,
We've received a book from the library with the challenging title What Do You Think
of the Modern Young Girl? I'd like to discuss this subject today.
The writer criticizes "today's youth" from head to toe, though without dismissing them
all as "hopeless cases." On the contrary, she believes they have it within their power
to build a bigger, better and more beautiful world, but that they occupy themselves
with superficial things, without giving a thought to true beauty. In some passages I
had the strong feeling that the writer was directing her disapproval at me, which is
why I finally want to bare my soul to you and defend myself against this attack.
I have one outstanding character trait that must be obvious to anyone who's known me
for any length of time: I have a great deal of self-knowledge. In everything I do, I
can watch myself as if I were a stranger. I can stand c across from the everyday
Anne and, without being biased or making excuses, watch what she's doing, both the
good and the bad. This self-awareness never leaves me, and every time I open my
mouth, I think, "You should have said that differently" or "That's fine the way it is." I
condemn myself in so many ways that I'm beginning to realize the truth of Father's
adage: "Every child has to raise itself." Parents can only advise their children or point
them in the right direction. Ultimately, people shape their own characters. In addition,
I face life with an extraordinary amount of courage. I feel so strong and capable of
bearing burdens, so young and free! When I first realized this, I was glad, because it
means I can more easily withstand the blows life has in store.
But I've talked about these things so often. Now I'd like to turn to the chapter "Father
and Mother Don't Understand Me." My parents have always spoiled me rotten, treated
me kindly, defended me against the van Daans and done all that parents can. And yet
for the longest time I've felt extremely lonely, left out, neglected and misunderstood.
Father did everything he could to curb my rebellious spirit, but it was no use. I've
cured myself by holding my behavior up to the light and looking at what I was doing
wrong.
Why didn't Father support me in my struggle? Why did he fall short when he tried to
offer me a helping hand? The answer is: he used the wrong methods. He always
talked to me as if I were a child going through a difficult phase. It sounds crazy,
since Father's the only one who's given me a sense of confidence and made me feel
as if I'm a sensible person. But he overlooked one thing: he failed to see that this
struggle to triumph over my difficulties was more important to me than anything else.
I didn't want to hear about "typical adolescent problems," or "other girls," or "you'll
grow out of it." I didn't want to be treated the same as all-the-other-girls, but as
Anne-in-her-own-right, and rim didn't understand that. Besides, I can't confide in
anyone unless they tell me a lot about themselves, and because I know very little
about him, I can't get on a more intimate footing. rim always acts like the elderly
father who once had the same fleeting im- pulses, but who can no longer relate to
me as a friend, no matter how hard he tries. As a result, I've never shared my
outlook on life or my long-pondered theories with anyone but my diary and, once in a
while, Margot. I've hid any- thing having to do with me from Father, never shared my
ideals with him, deliberately alienated myself from him.
I couldn't have done it any other way. I've let myself be guided entirely by my
feelings. It was egotistical, but I've done what was best for my own peace of mind. I
would lose that, plus the self-confidence I've worked so hard to achieve, if I were to
be subjected to criticism halfway through the job. It may sound hard-hearted, but I
can't take criticism from rim either, because not only do I never share my innermost
thoughts with him, but I've pushed him even further away by being irritable.
This is a point I think about quite often: why is it that rim annoys me so much
sometimes? I can hardly bear to have him tutor me, and his affection seems forced. I
want to be left alone, and I'd rather he ignored me for a while until I'm more sure of
myself when I'm talking to him! I'm still torn with guilt about the mean letter I wrote
him when I was so upset. Oh, it's hard to be strong and brave in every way!
. . .
Still, this hasn't been my greatest disappointment. No, I think about Peter much more
than I do Father. I know very well that he was my conquest, and not the other way
around. I created an image of him in my mind, pictured him as a quiet, sweet,
sensitive boy badly in need of friendship and love! I needed to pour out my heart to a
living person. I wanted a friend who would help me find my way again. I accomplished
what I set out to do and drew him, slowly but surely, toward me. When I finally got
him to be my friend, it automatically developed into an intimacy that, when I think
about it now, seems outrageous. We talked about the most private things, but we
haven't yet touched upon the things closest to my heart. I still can't make head or tail
of Peter. Is he superficial, or is it shyness that holds him back, even with me? But
putting all that aside, I made one mistake: I used intimacy to get closer to him, and in
doing so, I ruled out other forms of friendship. He longs to be loved, and I can see
he's beginning to like me more with each passing day. Our time together leaves him
feeling satisfied, but just makes me want to start all over again. I never broach the
subjects I long to bring out into the open. I forced Peter, more than he realizes, to
get close to me, and now he's holding on for dear life. I honestly don't see any
effective way of shaking him off and getting him back on his own two feet. I soon
realized he could never be a kindred spirit, but still tried to help him break out of his
narrow world and expand his youthful horizons.
"Deep down, the young are lonelier than the old." I read this in a book somewhere and
it's stuck in my mind. As far as I can tell, it's true.
So if you're wondering whether it's harder for the adults here than for the children,
the answer is no, it's certainly not. Older people have an opinion about everything and
are sure of themselves and their actions. It's twice as hard for us young people to
hold on to our opinions at a time when ideals are being shattered and destroyed, when
the worst side of human nature predominates, when everyone has come to doubt truth,
justice and God.
Anyone who claims that the older folks have a more difficult time in the Annex
doesn't realize that the problems have a far greater impact on us. We're much too
young to deal with these problems, but they keep thrusting themselves on us until,
finally, we're forced to think up a solution, though most of the time our solutions
crumble when faced with the facts. It's difficult in times like these: ideals, dreams and
cherished hopes rise within us, only to be crushed by grim reality. It's a wonder I
haven't abandoned all my ideals, they seem so absurd and impractical. Yet I cling to
them because I still believe, in spite of everything, that people are truly good at heart.
It's utterly impossible for me to build my life on a foundation of chaos, suffering and
death. I see the world being slowly transformed into a wilderness, I hear the
approaching thunder that, one day, will destroy us too, I feel the suffering of millions.
And yet, when I look up at the sky, I somehow feel that everything will change for
the better, that this cruelty too shall end, that peace and tranquthty will return once
more. In the meantime, I must hold on to my ideals. Perhaps the day will come when
I'll be able to realize them!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
FRIDAY, JULY 21, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
I'm finally getting optimistic. Now, at last, things are going well! They really are!
Great news! An assassination attempt has been made on Hitler's life, and for once not
by Jewish Communists or English capitalists, but by a German general who's not only
a count, but young as well. The Fuhrer owes his life to "Divine Providence": he
escaped, unfortunately, with only a few minor burns and scratches. A number of the
officers and generals who were nearby were killed or wounded. The head of the
conspiracy has been shot.
This is the best proof we've had so far that many officers and generals are fed up
with the war and would like to see Hitler sink into a bottomless pit, so they can
establish a mthtary dictatorship, make peace with the Allies, rearm themselves and,
after a few decades, start a new war. Perhaps Providence is deliberately biding its
time getting rid of Hider, since it's much easier, and cheaper, for the Allies to let the
impeccable Germans kill each other off. It's less work for the Russians and the British,
and it allows them to start rebuilding their own cities all that much sooner. But we
haven't reached that point yet, and I'd hate to anticipate the glorious event. Still,
you've probably noticed that I'm telling the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the
truth. For once, I'm not rattling on about high ideals.
Furthermore, Hitler has been so kind as to announce to his loyal, devoted people that
as of today all mthtary personnel are under orders of the Gestapo, and that any
soldier who knows that one of his superiors was involved in this cowardly attempt on
the Fuhrer's life may shoot him on sight!
A fine kettle of fish that will be. Little Johnny's feet are sore after a long march and
his commanding officer bawls him out. Johnny grabs his rifle, shouts, "You, you tried
to kill the Fuhrer. Take that!" One shot, and the snooty officer who dared to
reprimand him passes into eternal life (or is it eternal death?). Eventually, every time
an officer sees a soldier or gives an order, he'll be practically wetting his pants,
because the soldiers have more say-so than he does.
Were you able to follow that, or have I been skipping from one subject to another
again? I can't help it, the prospect of going back to school in October is making me
too happy to be logical! Oh dear, didn't I just get through telling you I didn't want to
anticipate events? Forgive me, Kitty, they don't call me a bundle of contradictions for
nothing!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
TUESDAY, AUGUST 1, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
"A bundle of contradictions" was the end of my previous letter and is the beginning of
this one. Can you please tell me exactly what "a bundle of contradictions" is? What
does "contradiction" mean? Like so many words, it can be interpreted in two ways: a
contradiction imposed from without and one imposed from within. The former means
not accepting other people's opinions, always knowing best, having the last word; in
short, all those unpleasant traits for which I'm known. The latter, for which I'm not
known, is my own secret.
As I've told you many times, I'm split in two. One side contains my exuberant
cheerfulness, my flippancy, my joy in life and, above all, my abthty to appreciate the
lighter side of things. By that I mean not finding anything wrong with flirtations, a
kiss, an embrace, an off-color joke. This side of me is usually lying in wait to
ambush the other one, which is much purer, deeper and finer. No one knows Anne's
better side, and that's why most people can't stand me. Oh, I can be an amusing clown
for an afternoon, but after that everyone's had enough of me to last a month. Actually,
I'm what a romantic movie is to a profound thinker -- a mere diversion, a comic
interlude, something that is soon forgotten: not bad, but not particularly good either. I
hate haVing to tell you this, but why shouldn't I admit it when I know it's true? My
lighter, more superficial side will always steal a march on the deeper side and
therefore always win. You can't imagine how often I've tried to p:ush away this Anne,
which is only half of what is known as Anne-to beat her down, hide her. But it
doesn't work, and I know why.
I'm afraid that people who know me as I usually am will discover I have another side,
a better and finer side. I'm afraid they'll mock me, think I'm ridiculous and sentimental
and not take me seriously. I'm used to not being taken seriously, but only the
"lighthearted" Anne is used to it and can put up with it; the "deeper" Anne is too
weak. If I force the good Anne into the spotlight for even fifteen minutes, she shuts
up like a clam the moment she's called upon to speak, and lets Anne number one do
the talking. Before I realize it, she's disappeared.
So the nice Anne is never seen in company. She's never made a single appearance,
though she almost always takes the stage when I'm alone. I know exactly how I'd like
to be, how I am . . . on the inside. But unfortunately I'm only like that with myself.
And perhaps that's why-no, I'm sure that's the reason why -- I think of myself as
happy on the inside and other people think I'm happy on the outside. I'm guided by
the pure Anne within, but on the outside I'm nothing but a frolicsome little goat
tugging at its tether.
As I've told you, what I say is not what I feel, which is why I have a reputation for
being boy-crazy as well as a flirt, a smart aleck and a reader of romances. The
happy-go-lucky Anne laughs, gives a flippant reply, shrugs her shoulders and
pretends she doesn't give a darn. The quiet Anne reacts in just the opposite way. If
I'm being completely honest, I'll have to admit that it does matter to me, that I'm
trying very hard to change myself, but that I I'm always up against a more powerful
enemy.
A voice within me is sobbing, "You see, that's what's become of you. You're
surrounded by negative opinions, dismayed looks and mocking faces, people, who
dislike you, and all because you don't listen to the ; advice of your own better half."
Believe me, I'd like ;' to listen, but it doesn't work, because if I'm quiet and serious,
everyone thinks I'm putting on a new act and I have to save myself with a joke, and
then I'm not even talking about my own family, who assume I must be sick, stuff me
with aspirins and sedatives, feel my neck and forehead to see if I have a temperature,
ask about my bowel movements and berate me for being in a bad mood, until I just
can't keep it up anymore, because jj when everybody starts hovering over me, I get
cross, then sad, and finally end up turning my heart inside g out, the bad part on the
outside and the good part on the inside, and keep trying to find a way to become
what I'd like to be and what I could be if . . . if only there were no other people in
the world.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
-----------------------
ANNE'S DIARY ENDS HERE.
-----------------------
AFTERWORD
On the morning of August 4, 1944, sometime between ten and ten-thirty, a car pulled
up at 263 Prinsengracht. Several figures emerged: an SS sergeant, Karl Josef
Silberbauer, in full uniform, and at least three Dutch members of the Security Police,
armed but in civilian clothes. Someone must have tipped them off.
They arrested the eight people hiding in the Annex, as well as two of their helpers,
Victor Kugler and Johannes Kleiman -- though not Miep Gies and Elisabeth (Bep)
Voskuijl-and took all the valuables and cash they could find in the Annex.
After the arrest, Kugler and Kleiman were taken to a prison in Amsterdam. On
September 11, 1944, they were transferred, without benefit of a trial, to a camp in
Amersfoort (Holland). Kleiman, because of his poor health, was released on September
18, 1944. He remained in Amsterdam until his death in 1959.
Kugler managed to escape his imprisonment on March 28, 1945, when he and his
fellow prisoners were being sent to Germany as forced laborers. He immigrated to
Canada in 1955 and died in Toronto in 1989.
Elisabeth (Bep) Voskuijl Wijk died in Amsterdam in 1983.
Miep Santrouschitz Gies is still living in Amsterdam; her husband Jan died in 1993.
Upon their arrest, the eight residents of the Annex were first brought to a prison in
Amsterdam and then transferred to Westerbork, the transit camp for Jews in the north
of Holland. They were deported on September 3, 1944, in the last transport to leave
Westerbork, and arrived three days later in Auschwitz (Poland).
Hermann van Pels (van Daan) was, according to the testimony of Otto Frank, gassed
to death in Auschwitz in October or November 1944, shortly before the gas chambers
were dismantled.
Auguste van Pels (Petronella van Daan) was transported from Auschwitz to
Bergen-Belsen, from there to Buchenwald, then to Theresienstadt on April 9, 1945,
and apparently to another concentration camp after that. It is certain that she did not
survive, though the date of her death is unknown.
Peter van Pels (van Daan) was forced to take part in the January 16, 1945 "death
march" from Auschwitz to Mauthausen (Austria), where he died on May 5, 1945, three
days before the camp was liberated.
Fritz Pfeffer (Albert Dussel) died on December 20, 1944, in the Neuengamme
concentration camp, where he had been transferred from either Buchenwald or
Sachsenhausen.
Edith Frank died in Auschwitz-Birkenau on January 6, 1945, from hunger and
exhaustion.
Margot and Anne Frank were transported from Auschwitz at the end of October and
brought to Bergen Belsen, a concentration camp near Hannover (Germany). The typhus
epidemic that broke out in the winter of 1944-1945, as a result of the horrendous
hygenic conditions, killed thousands of prisoners, including Margot and, a few days
later, Anne. She must have died in late February or early March. The bodies of both
girls were probably dumped in Bergen-Belsen's mass graves. The camp was liberated
by British troops on April 12, 1945.
Otto Frank was the only one of the eight to survive the concentration camps. After
Auschwitz was liberated by Russian troops, he was repatriated to Amsterdam by way
of Odessa and Marseille. He arrived in Amsterdam on June 3, 1945, and stayed there
until 1953, when he moved to Basel (Switzerland), where his sister and her family,
and later his brother, lived. He married Elfriede Markovits Geiringer, originally from
Vienna, who had survived Auschwitz and lost a husband and son in Mauthausen. Until
his death on August 19, 1980, Otto Frank continued to live in Birsfelden, outside
Basel, where he devoted himself to sharing the message of his daughter's diary with
people all over the world.
Project Gutenberg's The Fortunes of Oliver Horn, by F. Hopkinson Smith

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Fortunes of Oliver Horn

Author: F. Hopkinson Smith

Posting Date: August 5, 2012 [EBook #3417]
Release Date: September, 2003
First Posted: April 10, 2001

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FORTUNES OF OLIVER HORN ***




Produced by Duncan Harrod










  THE FORTUNES OF
  OLIVER HORN

by F. Hopkinson Smith




I DEDICATE THIS BOOK TO THE MEMORY OF


  "THE MAN OF ALL OTHERS ABOUT KENNEDY
  SQUARE MOST BELOVED, AND THE MAN OF ALL
  OTHERS LEAST UNDERSTOOD--RICHARD HORN,
  THE DISTINGUISHED INVENTOR."
  F.H.S.




  THE FORTUNES OF
  OLIVER HORN




CHAPTER I

THE OLD HOUSE IN KENNEDY SQUARE


Kennedy Square, in the late fifties, was a place of birds and trees and
flowers; of rude stone benches, sagging arbors smothered in vines, and
cool dirt-paths bordered by sweet-smelling box. Giant magnolias filled
the air with their fragrance, and climbing roses played hide and seek
among the railings of the rotting fence. Along the shaded walks
laughing boys and girls romped all day, with hoop and ball, attended by
old black mammies in white aprons and gayly colored bandannas; while in
the more secluded corners, sheltered by protecting shrubs, happy lovers
sat and talked, tired wayfarers rested with hats off, and staid old
gentlemen read by the hour, their noses in their books.

Outside of all this color, perfume, and old-time charm, outside the
grass-line and the rickety wooden fence that framed them in, ran an
uneven pavement splashed with cool shadows and stained with green
mould. Here, in summer, the watermelon-man stopped his cart; and here,
in winter, upon its broken bricks, old Moses unhooked his bucket of
oysters and ceased for a moment his droning call.

On the shady side of the square, and half-hidden in ivy, was a Noah's
Ark church, topped by a quaint belfry holding a bell that had not rung
for years, and faced by a clock-dial all weather-stains and cracks,
around which travelled a single rusty hand. In its shadow to the right
lay the home of the Archdeacon, a stately mansion with Corinthian
columns reaching to the roof and surrounded by a spacious garden filled
with damask roses and bushes of sweet syringa. To the left crouched a
row of dingy houses built of brick, their iron balconies hung in
flowering vines, the windows glistening with panes of wavy glass
purpled by age.

On the sunny side of the square, opposite the church, were more houses,
high and low; one all garden, filled with broken-nosed statues hiding
behind still more magnolias, and another all veranda and honeysuckle,
big rocking-chairs and swinging hammocks; and still others with
porticos curtained by white jasmine or Virginia creeper.

Half-way down this stretch of sunshine--and what a lovely stretch it
was--there had stood for years a venerable mansion with high chimneys,
sloping roof, and quaint dormer-windows, shaded by a tall sycamore that
spread its branches far across the street. Two white marble steps
guarded by old-fashioned iron railings led up to the front door, which
bore on its face a silver-plated knocker, inscribed in letters of black
with the name Of its owner--"Richard Horn." All three, the door, the
white marble steps, and the silver-plated knocker--not to forget the
round silver knobs ornamenting the newel posts of the railings--were
kept as bright as the rest of the family plate by that most loyal of
servants, old Malachi, who daily soused the steps with soap and water,
and then brought to a phenomenal polish the knocker, bell-pull, and
knobs by means of fuller's-earth, turpentine, hard breathing, and the
vigorous use of a buckskin rag.

If this weazened-faced, bald-headed old darky, resplendent in white
shirt-sleeves, green baize apron, and never-ceasing smile of welcome,
happened to be engaged in this cleansing and polishing process--and it
occurred every morning--and saw any friend of his master approaching,
he would begin removing his pail and brushes and throwing wide the
white door before the visitor reached the house, would there await his
coming, bent double in profound salutation. Indeed, whenever Malachi
had charge of the front steps he seldom stood upright, so constantly
was he occupied--by reason of his master's large acquaintance--in
either crooking his back in the beginning of a bow, or straightening it
up in the ending of one.

To one and all inquiries for Mr. Horn his answer during the morning
hours was invariably the same:

"Yes, sah, Marse Richard's in his li'l room wrastlin' wid his machine,
I reckon. He's in dar now, sah--" this with another low bow, and then
slowly recovering his perpendicular with eyes fixed on the retreating
figure, so as to be sure there was no further need of his services, he
would resume his work, drenching the steps again with soap-suds or
rubbing away on the door-plate or door-pull, stopping every other
moment to blow his breath on the polished surface.

When, however, someone asked for young Oliver, the inventor's only son,
the reply was by no means so definite, although the smile was a trifle
broader and the bow, if anything, a little more profound.

"Marse Oliver, did you say, sah? Dat's a difficult question, sah. Fo'
Gawd I ain't seen him since breakfas'. You might look into Jedge
Ellicott's office if you is gwine downtown, whar dey do say he's
studyin' law, an' if he ain't dar--an' I reckon he ain't--den you might
drap in on Mister Crocker, whar Marse Oliver's paintin' dem pictures;
an' if he ain't dar, den fo-sho he's wid some o' do young ladies, but
which one de Lawd only knows. Marse Oliver's like the rabbit, sah--he
don't leab no tracks," and Malachi would hold his sides in a chuckle of
so suffocating a nature that it would have developed into apoplexy in a
less wrinkled and emaciated person.

Inside of the front door of this venerable mansion ran a wide hall bare
of everything but a solid mahogany hat-rack and table with glass mirror
and heavy haircloth settee, over which, suspended from the ceiling,
hung a curious eight-sided lantern, its wick replaced with a modern
gas-burner. Above were the bedrooms, reached by a curved staircase
guarded by spindling mahogany bannisters with slender hand-rail--a
staircase so pure in style and of so distinguished an air that only
maidens in gowns and slippers should have tripped down its steps, and
only cavaliers in silk stockings and perukes have waited below for
their hands.

Level with the bare hall, opened two highly polished mahogany doors,
which led respectively into the drawing-room and library, their windows
draped in red damask and their walls covered with family portraits. All
about these rooms stood sofas studded with brass nails, big easy-chairs
upholstered in damask, and small tables piled high with magazines and
papers. Here and there, between the windows, towered a bookcase crammed
with well-bound volumes reaching clear to the ceiling. In the centre of
each room was a broad mantel sheltering an open fireplace, and on cold
days--and there were some pretty cold days about Kennedy Square--two
roaring wood-fires dispensed comfort, the welcoming blaze of each
reflected in the shining brass fire-irons and fenders.

Adjoining the library was the dining-room with its well-rubbed mahogany
table, straight-backed chairs, and old sideboard laden with family
silver, besides a much-coveted mahogany cellaret containing some of
that very rare Madeira for which the host was famous. Here were more
easy-chairs and more portraits--one of Major Horn, who fell at
Yorktown, in cocked hat and epaulets, and two others in mob-caps and
ruffles--both ancient grandmothers of long ago.

The "li'l room ob Marse Richard," to which in the morning Malachi
directed all his master's visitors, was in an old-fashioned one-story
out-house, with a sloping roof, that nestled under the shade of a big
tulip-tree in the back yard--a cool, damp, brick-paved old yard, shut
in between high walls mantled with ivy and Virginia creeper and capped
by rows of broken bottles sunk in mortar. This out-building had once
served as servants' quarters, and it still had the open fireplace and
broad hearth before which many a black mammy had toasted the toes of
her pickaninnies, as well as the trap-door in the ceiling leading to
the loft where they had slept. Two windows which peered out from under
bushy eyebrows of tangled honeysuckle gave the only light; a
green-painted wooden door, which swung level with the moist bricks, the
only entrance.

It was at this green-painted wooden door that you would have had to
knock to find the man of all others about Kennedy Square most beloved,
and the man of all others least understood--Richard Horn, the
distinguished inventor.

Perhaps at the first rap he would have been too absorbed to hear you.
He would have been bending over his carpenter-bench--his deep,
thoughtful eyes fixed on a drawing spread out before him, the shavings
pushed back to give him room, a pair of compasses held between his
fingers. Or he might have been raking the coals of his forge--set up in
the same fireplace that had warmed the toes of the pickaninnies, his
long red calico working-gown, which clung about his spare body, tucked
between his knees to keep it from the blaze. Or he might have been
stirring a pot of glue--a wooden model in his hand--or hammering away
on some bit of hot iron, the brown paper cap that hid his sparse gray
locks pushed down over his broad forehead to protect it from the heat.

When, however, his ear had caught the tap of your knuckles and he had
thrown wide the green door, what a welcome would have awaited you! How
warm the grasp of his fine old hand; how cordial his greeting.

"Disturb me, my dear sir," he would have said in answer to your
apologies, "that's what I was put in the world for. I love to be
disturbed. Please do it every day. Come in! Come in! It's delightful to
get hold of your hand."

If you were his friend, and most men who knew him were, he would have
slipped his arm through your own, and after a brief moment you would
have found yourself poring over a detailed plan, his arm still in
yours, while he showed you the outline of some pin, or lever, needed to
perfect the most marvellous of all discoveries of modern times--his new
galvanic motor.

If it were your first visit, and he had touched in you some sympathetic
chord, he would have uncovered a nondescript combination of glass jars,
horse-shoe magnets, and copper wires which lay in a curious shaped box
beneath one of the windows, and in a voice trembling with emotion as he
spoke, he would have explained to you the value of this or that lever,
and its necessary relation to this new invention of his which was so
soon to revolutionize the motive power of the world. Or he would
perhaps have talked to you as he did to me, of his theories and beliefs
and of what he felt sure the future would bring forth.

"The days of steam-power are already numbered. I may not live to see
it, but you will. This new force is almost within my grasp. I know
people laugh, but so they have always done. All inventors who have
benefited mankind have first been received with ridicule. I can expect
no better treatment. But I have no fear of the result. The steady
destruction of our forests and the eating up of our coal-fields must
throw us back on chemistry for our working power. There is only one
solution of this problem--it lies in the employment of a force which
this machine will compel to our uses. I have not perfected the
apparatus yet, as you see, but it is only a question of time.
To-morrow, perhaps, or next week, or next year--but it will surely
come. See what Charles Bright and this Mr. Cyrus Field are
accomplishing. If it astonishes you to realize that we will soon talk
to each other across the ocean, why should the supplanting of steam by
a new energy seem so extraordinary? The problems which they have worked
out along the lines of electricity, I am trying to work out along the
lines of galvanism. Both will ultimately benefit the human race."

And while he talked you would have listened with your eyes and ears
wide open, and your heart too, and believed every word he said, no
matter how practical you might have been or how unwilling at first to
be convinced.

On another day perhaps you might have chanced to knock at his door when
some serious complication had vexed him--a day when the cogs and
pulleys upon which he had depended for certain demonstration had become
so tangled up in his busy brain that he had thoughts for nothing else.
Then, had he pushed pack his green door to receive you, his greeting
might have been as cordial and his welcome as hearty, but before long
you would have found his eyes gazing into vacancy, or he would have
stopped half-way in an answer to your question, his thoughts far away.
Had you loved him you would then have closed the green door behind you
and left him alone. Had you remained you would, perhaps, have seen him
spring from his seat and pick up from his work-bench some unfinished
fragment. This he would have plunged into the smouldering embers of his
forge and, entirely forgetful of your presence, would have seized the
handle of the bellows, his eyes intent on the blaze, his lips muttering
broken sentences. At these moments, as he would peer into the curling
smoke, one thin hand upraised, the long calico gown wrinkling about his
spare body, the paper cap on his head, he would have looked like some
alchemist of old, or weird necromancer weaving a mystic spell.
Sometimes, as you watched his face, with the glow of the coals lighting
up his earnest eyes, there would have flashed across his troubled
features, as heat lightning illumines a cloud, some sudden brightness
from within followed by a quick smile of triumph. The rebellious
fragment had been mastered. For the hundredth time the great motor was
a success!

And yet, had this very pin or crank or cog, on which he had set such
store, refused the next hour or day or week to do its work, no trace of
his disappointment would have been found in his face or speech. His
faith was always supreme; his belief in his ideals unshaken. If the pin
or crank would not answer, the lever or pulley would. It was the
"adjustment" that was at fault, not the principle. And so the dear old
man would work on, week after week, only to abandon his results again,
and with equal cheerfulness and enthusiasm to begin upon another
appliance totally unlike any other he had tried before. "It was only a
mile-stone," he would say; "every one that I pass brings me so much
nearer the end."

If you had been only a stranger--some savant, for instance, who wanted
a problem in mechanics solved, or a professor, blinded by the dazzling
light of the almost daily discoveries of the time, in search of mental
ammunition to fire back at curious students daily bombarding you with
puzzling questions; or had you been a thrifty capitalist, holding back
a first payment until an expert like Richard Horn had passed upon the
merits of some new labor-saving device of the day; had you been any one
of these, and you might very easily have been, for such persons came
almost daily to see him, the inventor would not only have listened to
your wants, no matter how absorbed he might have been in his own work,
but he would not have allowed you to leave him until he was sure that
your mind was at rest.

Had you, however, been neither friend nor client, but some unbeliever
fresh from the gossip of the Club, where many of the habitues not only
laughed at the inventor's predictions for the future, but often lost
their tempers in discussing his revolutionary ideas; or had you, in a
spirit of temerity, entered his room armed with arguments for his
overthrow, nothing that your good-breeding or the lack of it would have
permitted you to have said could have ruffled his gentle spirit. With
the tact of a man of wide experience among men, he would have turned
the talk into another channel--music, perhaps, or some topic of the
day--and all with such exquisite grace that you would have forgotten
the subject you came to discuss until you found yourself outside the
yard and half-way across Kennedy Square before realizing that the
inventor had made no reply to your attacks.

But whoever you might have been, whether the friend of years, the
anxious client, or the trifling unbeliever, and whatever the purpose of
your visit, whether to shake his hand again for the very delight of
touching it, to seek advice, or to combat his theories, you would have
carried away the impression of a man whose like you had never met
before--a man who spoke in a low, gentle voice, and yet, with an
authority that compelled attention; enthusiastic over the things he
loved, silent over those that pained him; a scholar of wide learning,
yet skilled in the use of tools that obeyed him as readily as nimble
fingers do a hand; a philosopher eminently sane on most of the accepted
theories of the day and yet equally insistent in his support of many of
the supposed sophistries and so-called "fanaticisms of the hour"; an
old-time aristocrat holding fast to the class distinctions of his
ancestors and yet glorying in the dignity of personal labor; a patriot
loyal to the traditions of his State and yet so opposed to the bondage
of men and women that he had freed his own slaves the day his father's
will was read; a cavalier reverencing a woman as sweetheart, wife, and
mother, and yet longing for the time to come when she, too, could make
a career, then denied her, coequal in its dignity with that of the man
beside her.

A composite personality of strange contradictions; of pronounced
accomplishments and yet of equally pronounced failures. And yet,
withal, a man so gracious in speech, so courtly in bearing, so helpful
in counsel, so rational, human, and lovable, that agree with him or
not, as you pleased, his vision would have lingered with you for days.

When night came the inventor would rake the coals from the forge, and
laying aside his paper cap and calico gown, close the green door of his
shop, cross the brick pavement of the back yard, and ascend the stairs
with the spindling bannisters to his dressing room. Here Malachi would
have laid out the black swallow-tail coat with the high velvet collar,
trousers to match, double-breasted waistcoat with gilt buttons, and
fluffy cravat of white silk.

Then, while his master was dressing, the old servant would slip
down-stairs and begin arranging the several rooms for the evening's
guests--for there were always guests at night. The red damask curtains
would be drawn close, the hearth swept clean, and fresh logs thrown on
the andirons. The lamp in the library would be lighted, and his
master's great easy-chair wheeled close to a low table piled high with
papers and magazines, his big-eyed reading-glasses within reach of his
hand. The paper would be unfolded, aired at the snapping blaze, and
hung over the arm of the chair. These duties attended to, the old
servant, with a last satisfied glance about the room, would betake
himself to the foot of the stair-case, there to await his master's
coming, glancing overhead at every sound, and ready to conduct him to
his chair by the fire.

When Richard, his toilet completed, appeared at the top of the stairs,
Malachi would stand until his master had reached the bottom step, wheel
about, and, with head up, gravely and noiselessly precede him into the
drawing-room--the only time he ever dared to walk before him--and with
a wave of the hand and the air of a prince presenting one of his
palaces, would say--"Yo' char's all ready, Marse Richard; bright fire
burnin'." Adding, with a low, sweeping bow, now that the ceremony was
over--"Hope yo're feelin' fine dis evenin', sah."

He had said it hundreds of times in the course of the year, but always
with a salutation that was a special tribute, and always with the same
low bow, as he gravely pulled out the chair, puffing up the back
cushion, his wrinkled hands resting on it until Richard had taken his
seat. Then, with equal gravity, he would hand his master the evening
paper and the big-bowed spectacles, and would stand gravely by until
Richard had dismissed him with a gentle "Thank you, Malachi; that will
do." And Malachi, with the serene, uplifted face as of one who had
served in a temple, would tiptoe out to his pantry.

It had gone on for years--this waiting for Richard at the foot of the
staircase. Malachi had never missed a night when his master was at
home. It was not his duty--not a part of the established regime of the
old house. No other family servant about Kennedy Square performed a
like service for master or mistress. It was not even a custom of the
times.

It was only one of "Malachi's ways," Richard would say, with a gentle
smile quivering about his lips.

"I do dat 'cause it's Marse Richard--dat's all," Malachi would answer,
drawing himself up with the dignity of a chamberlain serving a king,
when someone had the audacity to question him--a liberty he always
resented.

They had been boys together--these two. They had fished and hunted and
robbed birds' nests and gone swimming with each other. They had fought
for each other, and been whipped for each other many and many a time in
the old plantation-days. Night after night in the years that followed
they had sat by each other when one or the other was ill.

And now that each was an old man the mutual service was still continued.

"How are you getting on now, Malachi--better? Ah, that's good--" and
the master's thin white hand would be laid on the black wrinkled head
with a soothing touch.

"Allus feels better, Marse Richard, when I kin git hold ob yo' han',
sah--" Malachi would answer.

Not his slave, remember. Not so many pounds of human flesh and bone and
brains condemned to his service for life; for Malachi was free to come
and go and had been so privileged since the day the old Horn estate had
been settled twenty years before, when Richard had given him his
freedom with the other slaves that fell to his lot; not that kind of a
servitor at all, but his comrade, his chum, his friend; the one man,
black as he was, in all the world who in laying down his life for him
would but have counted it as gain.

Just before tea Mrs. Horn, with a thin gossamer shawl about her
shoulders, would come down from her bedroom above and join her husband.
Then young Oliver himself would come bounding in, always a little late,
but always with his face aglow and always bubbling over with laughter,
until Malachi, now that the last member of the family was at home,
would throw open the mahogany doors, and high tea would be served in
the dining-room on the well-rubbed, unclothed mahogany table, the
plates, forks, and saucers under Malachi's manipulations touching the
polished wood as noiselessly as soap-bubbles.

Tea served and over, Malachi would light the candies in the big,
cut-glass chandelier in the front parlor--the especial pride of the
hostess, it having hung in her father's house in Virginia.

After this he would retire once more to his pantry, this time to make
ready for some special function to follow; for every evening at the
Horn mansion had its separate festivity. On Mondays small whist-tables
that unfolded or let down or evolved from half-moons into circles,
their tops covered with green cloth, were pulled out or moved around so
as to form the centres of cosey groups. Some extra sticks of hickory
would be brought in and piled on the andirons, and the huge
library-table, always covered with the magazines of the day--Littell's,
Westminster, Blackwood's, and the Scientific Review, would be pushed
back against the wall to make room.

On Wednesdays there would be a dinner at six o'clock, served without
pretence or culinary assistance from the pastry-cook outside--even the
ices were prepared at home. To these dinners any distinguished
strangers who were passing through the city were sure to be invited.
Malachi in his time had served many famous men--Charles Dickens, Ole
Bull, Macready, and once the great Mr. Thackeray himself with a second
glass of "that pale sherry, if you please," and at the great man's
request, too. An appreciation which, in the case of Mr. Thackeray, had
helped to mollify Malachi's righteous wrath over the immortal
novelist's ignorance of Southern dishes:

"Dat fat gemman wid de gold specs dat dey do say is so mighty great,
ain't eat nuffin yet but soup an' a li'l mite o' 'tater," he said to
Aunt Hannah on one of his trips to the kitchen as dinner went on. "He
let dat tar'pin an' dem ducks go by him same as dey was pizen. But I
lay he knows 'bout dat ole yaller sherry," and Malachi chuckled. "He
keeps a' retchin' fur dat decanter as if he was 'feared somebody'd git
it fust."

On Fridays there would invariably be a musicale--generally a quartette,
with a few connoisseurs to listen and to criticise. Then the piano
would be drawn out from its corner and the lid propped up, so that Max
Unger of the "Harmonie" could find a place for his 'cello behind it,
and there still be room for the inventor with his violin--a violin with
a tradition, for Ole Bull had once played on it and in that same room,
too, and had said it had the soul of a Cremona--which was quite true
when Richard Horn touched its strings.

On all the other nights of the week Mrs. Horn was at home to all who
came. Some gentle old lady from across the Square, perhaps, in lace
caps and ribbons, with a work-basket filled with fancy crewels, and
whose big son came at nine o'clock to take her home; or Oliver's young
friends, boys and girls; or old Doctor Wallace, full of the day's
gossip; or Miss Lavinia Clendenning, with news of the latest Assembly;
or Nathan Gill with his flute.

But then it was Nathan always, whatever the occasion. From the time
Malachi unlocked the front doors in the morning until he bolted them
for the night, Nathan came and went. The brick pavements were worn
smooth, the neighbors said, between the flute-player's humble lodgings
in a side street and the Horn house, so many trips a day did the old
man make. People smiled at him as he hurried along, his head bent
forward, his long pen-wiper cloak reaching to his heels, a wide-brimmed
Quaker hat crowning his head.

And always, whenever the night or whatever the function or whoever the
guests, a particular side-table was sure to be moved in from Malachi's
pantry and covered with a snow-white cloth which played an important
part in the evening's entertainment. This cloth was never empty. Upon
its damask surface were laid a pile of India-blue plates and a silver
basket of cake, besides a collection of low glass tumblers with little
handles, designed to hold various brews of Malachi's own concoctions,
which he alone of all the denizens of Kennedy Square could compound,
and the secret of which unhappily has perished with him.

And what wondrous aromas, too!

You may not believe it, but I assure you, on the honor of a Virginian,
that for every one of these different nights in the old house on
Kennedy Square there were special savory odors emanating from these
brews, which settled at once and beyond question the precise function
of the evening, and all before you could hand your hat to Malachi. If,
for instance, as the front door was opened the aroma was one of hot
coffee and the dry smell of fresh wafer-biscuit mingled with those of a
certain brand of sherry, then it was always to be plain whist in the
parlor, with perhaps only Colonel Clayton and Miss Clendenning or some
one of the old ladies of the neighborhood, to hold hands in a rubber.
If the fumes of apple-toddy mingled with the fragrance of toasted
apples were wafted your way, you might be sure that Max Unger, and
perhaps Bobbinette, second violin, and Nathan--whatever the function it
was always Nathan, it must be remembered--and a few kindred spirits who
loved good music were expected; and at the appointed hour Malachi, his
hands encased in white cotton gloves, would enter with a flourish, and
would graciously beg leave to pass, the huge bowl held high above his
head filled to the brim with smoking apple-toddy, the little pippins
browned to a turn floating on its top.

If the occasion was one of great distinction, one that fell on
Christmas or on New Year's, or which celebrated some important family
gathering, the pungent odor of eggnog would have greeted you even
before you could have slipped off your gum-shoes in the hall, or hung
your coat on the mahogany rack. This seductive concoction--the most
potent of all Malachi's beverages--was always served from a green and
gold Chinese bowl, and drunk not from the customary low tumblers, but
from special Spode cups, and was, I must confess, productive of a
head--for I myself was once tempted to drink a bumper of it at this
most delightful of houses with young Oliver, many years ago, it is
true, but I have never forgotten it--productive of an ACHING head, I
think I said, that felt as big in the morning as the Canton bowl in
which the mixture had been brewed.

Or, if none of these functions or festivals were taking place, and only
one or two old cronies had dropped in on their way from the Club, and
had drawn up their chairs close to the dining-room table, and you had
happened to be hanging up your hat in the hall at that moment, you
would have been conscious of an aroma as delicate in flavor as that
wafted across summer seas from far-off tropic isles; of pomegranates,
if you will, ripening by crumbling walls; of purple grapes drinking in
the sun; of pine and hemlock; of sweet spices and the scent of roses.
or any other combination of delightful things which your excited
imagination might suggest.

You would have known then just what had taken place; how, when the
gentlemen were seated, Malachi in his undress blue coat and brass
buttons had approached his master noiselessly from behind, and with a
gravity that befitted the occasion had bent low his head, his hands
behind his back, his head turned on one side, and in a hushed voice had
asked this most portentous question:

"Which Madeira, Marse Richard?"

The only answer would have been a lifting of the eyebrow and an
imperceptible nod of his master's head in the direction of the mahogany
cellaret.

Malachi understood.

It was the Tiernan of '29.

And that worthy "Keeper of the Privy Seal and Key," pausing for an
instant with his brown jug of a head bent before the cellaret, as a
Mohammedan bends his head before a wall facing Mecca, had there-upon
unlocked its secret chambers and had produced a low, deeply cut
decanter topped by a wondrous glass stopper. This he had placed, with
conscious importance, on a small table before the two or three devotees
gathered together in its honor, and the host, removing the stopper, had
filled the slender glasses with a vintage that had twice rounded the
Cape--a wine of such rare lineage and flavor that those who had the
honor of its acquaintance always spoke of it as one of the most
precious possessions of the town--a wine, too, of so delicate an aroma
that those within the charmed circle invariably lifted the thin glasses
and dreamily inhaled its perfume before they granted their palates a
drop.

Ah, those marvellous, unforgettable aromas that come to me out of the
long ago with all the reminders they bring of clink of glass and touch
of elbow, of happy boys and girls and sweet old faces. It is forty
years since they greeted my nostrils in the cool, bare, uncurtained
hall of the old house in Kennedy Square, but they are still fresh in my
memory. Sometimes it is the fragrance of newly made gingerbread, or the
scent of creamy custard with just a suspicion of peach-kernels;
sometimes it is the scent of fresh strawberries--strawberries that
meant the spring, not the hot-house or Bermuda--and sometimes it is the
smell of roasted oysters or succulent canvas-backs! Forty years
ago--and yet even to-day the perfume of a roasted apple never greets me
but I stand once more in the old-fashioned room listening to the sound
of Nathan's flute; I see again the stately, silver-haired, high-bred
mistress of the mansion with her kindly greeting, as she moves among
her guests; I catch the figure of that old darkey with his brown, bald
head and the little tufts of gray wool fringing its sides, as he
shuffles along in his blue coat and baggy white waistcoat and
much-too-big gloves, and I hear the very tones of his voice as he
pushes his seductive tray before me and whispers, confidentially:

"Take a li'l ob de apple, sah; dat's whar de real 'spression oh de
toddy is."




CHAPTER II

STRAINS FROM NATHAN'S FLUTE


It was one of those Friday evenings, then, when the smell of roast
apples steeping in hot toddy came wafting out the portals of Malachi's
pantry--a smell of such convincing pungency that even the most
infrequent of frequenters having once inhaled it, would have known at
the first whiff that some musical function was in order. The night was
to be one of unusual interest.

Nathan Gill and Max linger were expected, and Miss Lavinia Clendenning,
completing with Richard a quartette for 'cello, flute, piano, and
violin, for which Unger had arranged Beethoven's Overture to "Fidelio."

Nathan, of course, arrived first. On ordinary occasions another of
those quaint ceremonies for which the house was famous would always
take place when the old flute-player entered the drawing-room--a
ceremony which brought a smile to the lips of those who had watched it
for years, and which to this day brings one to those who recall it.
Nathan, with a look of quizzical anxiety on his pinched face, would
tiptoe cautiously into the room, peering about to make sure of
Richard's presence, his thin, almost transparent fingers outspread
before him to show Richard that they were empty. Richard would step
forward and, with a tone of assumed solicitude in his voice, would say:

"Don't tell me, Nathan, that you have forgotten your flute?" and
Nathan, pausing for a moment, would suddenly break into a smile, and
with a queer little note of surprise in his throat, and a twinkle in
his eye, would make answer by slowly drawing from his coat-tail pocket
the three unjointed pieces, holding them up with an air of triumph and
slowly putting them together. Then these two old "Merry-Andrews" would
lock arms and stroll into the library, laughing like school-boys.

To-night, however, as Nathan had been specially invited to play, this
little ceremony was omitted. On entering the hall the musician gave his
long, black, pen-wiper cloak and his hat to Malachi, and supporting
himself by his delicate fingers laid flat on the hall-table, extended
first one thin leg, and then the other, while that obsequious darky
unbuttoned his gaiters. His feet free, he straightened himself up,
pulled the precious flute from his coat-tail pocket and carefully
joined the parts. This done, he gave a look into the hall-mirror,
puffed out his scarf, combed his straight white hair forward over his
ears with his fingers, and at Malachi's announcement glided through the
open doorway to Mrs. Horn's chair, the flute in his hand held straight
out as an orator would have held his roll.

The hostess, who had been sitting by the fire, her white gossamer shawl
about her spare shoulders, rose from her high-backed chair and, laying
aside her knitting-needles and wools, greeted the musician with as much
cordiality--and it must be confessed with as much ceremony--as if she
had not seen him a dozen times that week. One of the charms of the Horn
mansion lay in these delightful blendings of affection and formality.

"Am I a little early?" he asked with as much surprise as if he were not
as certain to be early when music was concerned as he was to be late in
everything else. "Yes, my dear madam--I see that I am early, unless
Miss Lavinia is late."

"You never could be too early, Nathan. Lavinia will be here in a
moment," she answered, with a smile, resuming her seat.

"I'm glad that I'm ahead of her for once," he replied, laughing. Then,
turning to the inventor, who had come forward from where he had been
studying the new score, he laid his hand affectionately on Richard's
shoulder, as a boy would have done, and added: "How do you like Unger's
new arrangement?--I've been thinking of nothing else all day."

"Capital! Capital!" answered Richard, slipping his arm into Nathan's,
and drawing him closer to the piano. "See how he has treated this
adagio phrase," and he followed the line with his finger, humming the
tune to Nathan. "The modulation, you see, is from E Major to A Major,
and the flute sustains the melody, the effect is so peculiarly soft and
the whole so bright with passages of sunshine all through it--oh, you
will love it."

While these two white-haired enthusiasts with their heads together were
studying the score, beating time with their hands, after the manner of
experts to whom all the curious jumble of dots and lines that plague so
many of us are as plain as print, Malachi was receiving Miss
Clendenning in the hall. Indeed, he had answered her knock as Nathan
was passing into the drawing-room.

The new arrival bent her neck until Malachi had relieved her of the
long hooded cloak, gave a quick stamp with her little feet as she shook
out her balloon skirts, and settled herself on the hall-settee while
Malachi unwound the white worsted "nubia" from her aristocratic throat.
This done, she, too, held a short consultation with the hall-mirror,
carefully dusting, with her tiny handkerchief, the little pats of
powder still left on her cheeks, and with her jewelled fingers
smoothing the soft hair parted over her forehead, and tightening
meanwhile the side-combs that kept in place the clusters of short curls
which framed her face. Then, with head erect and a gracious recognition
of the old servant's ministrations, she floated past Malachi, bent
double in her honor.

"Oh, I heard you, Nathan," she laughed, waving her fan toward him as
she entered the room. "I'm not one minute late. Did you ever hear such
impudence, Sallie, and all because he reached your door one minute
before me," she added, stooping to kiss Mrs. Horn. Punctuality was one
of the cardinal virtues of this most distinguished, prim, precise, and
most lovable of old maids. "You are really getting to be dreadful, Mr.
Nathan Gill, and so puffed up--isn't he, Richard?" As she spoke she
turned abruptly and faced both gentlemen. Then, with one of her
rippling laughs--a laugh that Richard always said reminded him of the
notes of a bird--she caught her skirts in her fingers, made the most
sweeping of courtesies and held out her hands to the two gentlemen who
were crossing the room to meet her.

Richard, with the bow of a Cavalier, kissed the one offered him as
gallantly as if she had been a duchess, telling her he had the rarest
treat in store for her as soon as Unger came, and Nathan with mock
devotion held the other between his two palms, and said that to be
scolded by Miss Clendenning was infinitely better than being praised by
anybody else. These pleasantries over, the two old gallants returned to
the piano to wait for Max Unger and to study again the crumpled pages
of the score which lay under the soft light of the candles.

The room relapsed once more into its wonted quiet, broken only by the
whispered talk of well-bred people careful not to disturb each other.
Mrs. Horn had begun to knit again. Miss Clendenning stood facing the
fire, one foot resting on the fender.

This wee foot of the little lady was the delight and admiration of all
the girls about Kennedy Square, and of many others across the seas,
too--men and women for that matter. To-night it was encased in a black
satin slipper and in a white spider-web stocking, about which were
crossed two narrow black ribbons tied in a bow around the ankle--such a
charming little slipper peeping out from petticoats all bescalloped and
belaced! Everything in fact about this dainty old maid, with her trim
figure filling out her soft white fichu, still had that subtlety of
charm which had played havoc with more than one heart in her day. Only
Sallie Horn, who had all the dear woman's secrets, knew where those
little feet had stepped and what hopes they had crushed. Only Sallie
Horn, too, knew why the delicate finger was still bare of a plain gold
ring. The world never thought it had made any difference to Miss
Lavinia, but then the world had never peeped under the lower lid of
Miss Clendenning's heart.

Suddenly the hushed quiet of the room was broken by a loud knock at the
front door, or rather by a series of knocks, so quick and sharp that
Malachi started from his pantry on the run.

"That must be Max," said Richard. "Now, Lavinia, we will move the
piano, so as to give you more room."

Mrs. Horn pushed back her chair, rose to her feet, and stood waiting to
receive the noted 'cellist, without whom not a note could be sounded,
and Miss Clendenning took her foot from the fender and dropped her
skirts.

But it was not Max!

Not wheezy, perspiring old Max Unger after all, walking into the room
mopping his face with one hand and with the other lugging his big
'cello, embalmed in a green baize bag--he would never let Malachi touch
it--not Max at all, but a fresh, rosy-cheeked young fellow of
twenty-two, who came bounding in with a laugh, tossing his hat to
Malachi--a well-knit, muscular young fellow, with a mouth full of white
teeth and a broad brow projecting over two steel-blue eyes that were
snapping with fun.

With his coming the quiet of the place departed and a certain breezy
atmosphere permeated the room as if a gust of cool wind had followed
him. With him, too, came a hearty, whole-souled joyousness--a
joyousness of so sparkling and so radiant a kind that it seemed as if
all the sunshine he had breathed for twenty years in Kennedy Square had
somehow been stored away in his boyish veins.

"Oh, here you are, you dear Miss Lavinia," he cried out, his breath
half gone from his dash across the Square. "How did you get here first?"

"On my two feet, you stupid Oliver," cried Miss Lavinia, shaking her
curls at him. "Did you think somebody carried me?"

"No, I didn't; but that wouldn't be much to carry, Miss Midget." His
pet name for her. "But which way did you come? I looked up and down
every path and--"

"And went all the way round by Sue Clayton's to find me, didn't you?
Oh, you can't throw dust in the Midget's eyes, you young rascal!" and
she stretched up her two dainty hands; drew his face toward her, and
kissed him on the lips.

"There--" and she patted his cheek--"now tell me all about it, you dear
Ollie. What did you want to see me for?" she added with one of those
quick divinations that made her so helpful a confidante. Then, in a
lowered voice--"What has Sue done?"

"Nothing--not one thing. She isn't bothering her head about me. I only
stopped there to leave a book, and--"

Mrs. Horn, with laughing, inquiring eyes, looked up from her chair at
Miss Clendenning, and made a little doubting sound with her lips.
Black-eyed Sue Clayton, with her curls down her back, home from
boarding-school for the Easter holidays, was Oliver's latest flame. His
mother loved to tease him about his love-affairs; and always liked him
to have a new one. She could see farther into his heart she thought
when the face of some sweet girl lay mirrored in its depths.

Oliver heard the doubting sound his mother made, and, reaching over her
chair, flung his arms about her neck and kissed her as if she had been
a girl.

"Now, don't you laugh, you dear old motherkins," he cried, drawing her
nearer to him until her face touched his. "Sue don't care a thing about
me, and I did promise her the book, and I ran every step of the way to
give it to her--didn't I, Uncle Nat?" he added, gayly, hoping to divert
the topic. "You were behind the sun-dial when I passed--don't you
remember?" He shrank a little from the badinage.

The old musician heard the question, but only waved his flute behind
him in answer. He did not even lift his head from beside Richard's at
the score.

Oliver waited an instant, and getting no further reply, released his
hold about his mother's neck, now that he had kissed her into silence,
and turned to Miss Clendenning again.

"Come, Miss Lavinia--come into the library. I've something very
important to talk to you about. Really, now; no nonsense about it!
You've plenty of time--old Max won't be here for an hour, he's always
late, isn't he, mother?"

Miss Clendenning turned quietly, lifted her eyes in a martyr-like way
toward Mrs. Horn, who shook her head playfully in answer, and with
Oliver's arm about her entered the library. She could never refuse any
one of the young people when they came to her with their secrets--most
important and never-to-be-postponed secrets, of course, that could
hardly wait the telling. Her little tea-room across the Square, with
its red damask curtains, its shiny brass andirons, easy-chairs and
lounges, was really more of a confessional than a boudoir. Many a
sorrow had been drowned in the cups of tea that she had served with her
own hand in egg-shell Spode cups, and many a young girl and youth who
had entered its cosey interior with heavy hearts had left it with the
sunshine of a new hope breaking through their tears. But then everybody
knew the bigness of Miss Clendenning's sympathies. It was one of the
things for which they loved her.

She, of course, knew what the boy wanted now. If it were not to talk
about Sue Clayton it was sure to be about some one of the other girls.
The young people thought of nothing else but their love-affairs, and
talked of nothing else, and the old people loved to live their youth
over again in listening. It was one of the traditional customs of
Kennedy Square.

Miss Clendenning settled herself in a corner of the carved haircloth
sofa, touched her side-combs with her finger to see that they were in
place, tucked a red cushion behind her back, crossed her two little
feet on a low stool, the two toes peeping out like the heads of two
mice, and taking Oliver's hand in hers said, in her sweet, coaxing
voice:

"Now, you dear boy, it is Sue, isn't it?"

"No!"

"Not Sue? Who then?"

"Mr. Crocker."

"What Mr. Crocker?" She arched her eyebrows and looked at him in
surprise. The name came as a shock. She knew of Mr. Crocker, of course,
but she wanted Oliver to describe him. Surely, she thought, with a
sudden sense of alarm, the boy has not fallen in love with the daughter
of that shabby old man.

"Why, the landscape-painter--the one father knows. I have been taking
drawing lessons of him and he says I've got a lot of talent and that
all I want is practice. He says that if I begin now and draw from the
cast three or four hours a day that by the end of the year I can begin
in color; and then I can go to New York and study, and then to Paris."

The little lady scrutinized him from under her eyelids. The boy's
enthusiasm always delighted her; she would often forget what he was
talking about, so interested was she in following his gestures as he
spoke.

"And what then?"

"Why then I can be a painter, of course. Isn't that a great deal better
than sitting every day in Judge Ellicott's dingy office reading
law-books? I hate the law!"

"And you love Mr. Crocker?"

"Yes, don't you?"

"I don't know him, Ollie. Tell me what he is like."

"Well, he isn't young any more. He's about father's age, but he's a
splendid old man, and he's so poor! Nobody buys his pictures, nor
appreciates him, and, just think, he has to paint portraits and dogs
and anything he can get to do. Don't you think that's a shame? Nobody
goes to see him but father and Uncle Nat and one or two others. They
don't seem to think him a gentleman." He was putting the case so as to
enlist all her sympathies at once.

"He has a daughter, hasn't he?" She was probing him quietly and without
haste. Time enough for her sympathies to work when she got at the facts.

"Yes, but I don't like her very much, for I don't think she's very good
to him." Miss Clendenning smothered a little sigh of relief; there was
no danger; thank Heaven, in that direction! What, then, could he want,
she thought to herself.

"And he's so different from anybody I ever met," Oliver continued. "He
doesn't talk about horses and duck-shooting and politics, or music or
cards like everyone you meet, except Daddy, but he talks about pictures
and artists and great men. Just think, he was a young student in
Dusseldorf for two years, and then he shouldered a knapsack and tramped
all through Switzerland, painting as he went, and often paying for his
lodgings with his sketches. Then he was in Paris for ever so long, and
now he is here, where--"

"Where you tell me he is painting dogs for a living," interrupted Miss
Clendenning. "Do you think, you young scapegrace, that this would be
better than being a lawyer like Judge Ellicott?" and she turned upon
him with one of her quick outbursts of mock indignation.

"But I'm not going to paint dogs," he replied, with some impatience. "I
am going to paint women, like the Sir Peter Lely that Uncle John
Tilghman has. Oh, she's a beauty! I took Mr. Crocker to see her the
other day. It had just been brought in from the country, you know. You
should have heard him go on. He says there's nobody who can paint a
portrait like it nowadays. He raved about her. You know it is Uncle
John Tilghman's grandmother when she was a girl." His voice suddenly
dropped to a more serious tone as he imparted this last bit of
information.

Miss Clendenning knew whose grandmother it was, and knew and loved
every tone in the canvas. It had hung in the Tilghman Manor-House for
years and was one of its most precious treasures, but she did not
intend to stop and discuss it now.

"Mr. Crocker wants me to copy it just as soon as I draw a little
better. Uncle John will let me, I know."

Miss Clendenning tapped her foot in a noiseless tattoo upon the stool,
and for a time looked off into space. She wanted to draw him out, to
know from what depth this particular enthusiasm had sprung. She was
accustomed to his exuberance of spirits, it was one of the many things
she loved him for. If this new craze were but an idle fancy, and he had
had many of them, it would wear itself out, and the longer they talked
about it the better. If, however, it sprang from an inborn taste, and
was the first indication of a hitherto undeveloped talent forcing
itself to the surface, the situation was one demanding the greatest
caution. Twigs like Oliver bent at the wrong time might never
straighten out again.

"And why did you come to me about this, Ollie; why don't you talk to
your father?"

"I have. He doesn't object. He says that Mr. Crocker is one of the rare
men of the time, and that only inexperience among the people here
prevents him from being appreciated. That's what he goes to see him
for. It isn't father that worries me, it's mother. I know just whet
she'll say. She's got her heart set on my studying law, and she won't
listen to anything else. I wouldn't object to the law if I cared for
it, but I don't. That's what makes it come so hard."

"And you want me to speak to your mother?"

"Yes, of course. That's just what I DO want you to do. Nobody can help
me but you," he cried with that coaxing manner which would have seemed
effeminate until one looked at his well-built, muscular body and the
firm lines about his mouth. "You tell her of all the painters you knew
in London when you lived there, and of what they do and how they are
looked up to, and that some of them are gentlemen and not idlers and
loafers. Mother will listen to you, I know, and maybe then when I tell
her it won't be such a shock to her. Do you know it is incomprehensible
to me, all this contempt for people who don't do just the same things
that their grandfathers did. And how do I know, too, that they are
right about it all? It seems to me that when a man is born a gentleman
and is a gentleman he can follow any occupation he pleases. Instead of
his trade making him respectable he should make IT so." He spoke with a
virility she had never suspected in him before, this boy whom she had
held in her arms as a baby and who was still only the child to her.

"But, Ollie," she interrupted, in some surprise, "you must never forget
that you are your father's son. No one is absolutely independent in
this world; everyone has his family to consider." She was becoming not
only interested now, but anxious. Mr. Crocker had evidently been
teaching the boy something besides the way to use his pencil. Such
democratic ideas were rare in Kennedy Square.

"Yes, I know what you mean." He had sprung from his seat now and was
standing over her, she looking up into his face. "You mean that it is
all right for me to go into old Mr. Wardell's counting-house because he
sells coffee by the cargo, but that I can't take a situation in
Griggson's grocery here on the corner because he sells coffee by the
pound. You mean, too, that it is possible for a man to be a professor
or president of a college and still be a gentleman, but if he teaches
in the public school he is done for. You mean, too, that I could saw
off a patient's leg and still be invited to Uncle Tilghman's house to
dinner, but that if I pulled out one of his teeth I could only eat in
his kitchen."

Miss Clendenning threw back her head and laughed until the combs in her
side-curls needed refastening, but she did not interrupt him.

"I can't get this sort of thing into my head and I never will. And
father doesn't believe in it any more than I do, and I don't think that
mother would if it wasn't for a lot of old people who live around this
square and who talk of nothing all day but their relations and think
there's nobody worth knowing but themselves. Now, you've GOT to talk to
mother; I won't take no for an answer," and he threw himself down
beside her again. "Come, dear Midget, hold up your right hand and
promise me now, before I let you go," he pleaded in his wheedling way
that made him so lovable to his intimates, catching her two hands in
his and holding them tight.

Of course she promised. Had she ever refused him anything? And Oliver,
a boy again, now that his confessions were made, kissed her joyously on
both cheeks and instantly forgetting his troubles as his habit was when
prospects of relief had opened, he launched out into an account of a
wonderful adventure Mr. Crocker once had in an old town in Italy, where
he was locked up over-night in a convent by mistake; and how he had
slept on his knapsack in the chapel, and what the magistrate had said
to him the next day, and how he had to paint a portrait of that
suspicious officer to prove he was a painter and a man of the best
intentions. In his enthusiasm he not only acted the scene, but he
imitated the gesture and dialect of the several parties to the escapade
so perfectly that the little lady, in her delight over the story, quite
forgot her anxiety and even the musicale itself, and only remembered
the quartette when Malachi, bowing obsequiously before her, said:

"Dey's a-waitin' for you, Miss Lavinia. Mister Unger done come and
Marse Richard say he can't wait a minute."

When she and Oliver entered the drawing-room the 'cellist was the
centre of the group. He was stripping off the green baize cover from
his instrument and at the same time was apologizing, in his broken
English, for being so late. Richard was interrupting him with
enthusiastic outbursts over the new score which still lay under the wax
candles lighting the piano, and which he and Nathan, while waiting for
the musician, had been silently practising in sundry bobs of their
heads and rhythmic beatings of their hands.

"My dear Max," Richard continued, with a hand on the musician's
shoulder, patting him in appreciation as he spoke, "we will forgive you
anything. You have so exactly suited to the 'cello the opening theme.
And the flute passages!--they are exquisitely introduced. We will let
Miss Clendenning decide when she hears it--" and he turned Unger's head
in the direction of the advancing lady. "Here she comes now; you, of
course, know the fine quality of Miss Clendenning's ear."

Herr Unger placed his five fat fingers over his waist-baud, bowed as
low to Miss Lavinia as his great girth would permit, and said:

"Ah, yes, I know. Miss Clendenning not only haf de ear she haf de life
in de end of de finger. De piano make de sound like de bird when she
touch it."

The little lady thanked him in her sweetest voice, made a courtesy, and
extended her hand to Max, who kissed it with much solemnity, and
Richard, putting his arm around the 'cellist's fat shoulders, conducted
him across the room, whereupon Nathan, with the assumed air of an old
beau, offered his crooked elbow to Miss Clendenning as an apology for
having reached the house before her. Then, seating her at the piano
with a great flourish, he waved his hand to Oliver, who had drawn up a
chair beside his mother, and with a laugh, cried:

"Here, you young love; come and turn the leaves for Miss Lavinia. It
may keep you from running over other people in the dark, even if they
are accused of hiding behind sun-dials."

With the beginning of the overture Mrs. Horn laid down her work, and
drawing her white gossamer shawl about her shoulders gave herself up to
the enjoyment of the music. The overture was one of her favorites--one
she and Richard had often played together as a duet in their younger
days.

Leaning back in her easy-chair with half-closed eyes, her clear-cut
features in silhouette against the glow of the fire, her soft gray
curls nestling in the filmy lace that fell about her temples, she
expressed, in every line of her face and figure, that air of graceful
repose which only comes to those highly favored women who have all
their lives been nurtured in a home of loving hands, tender voices, and
noiseless servants--lives of never-ending affection without care or
sorrow.

And yet had you, even as she sat there, studied carefully this central
figure of the Horn mansion--this practical, outspoken, gentle-voiced,
tender wife and mother, tenacious of her opinions, yet big enough and
courageous enough to acknowledge her mistakes; this woman, wise in
counsel, sympathetic in sorrow, joyous with the young, restful with the
old, you would have discovered certain lines about her white forehead
which advancing years alone could not have accounted for.

These lines seemed all the deeper to-night. Only a few hours before,
Richard had come to her, while Malachi was arranging his clothes, with
the joyful news of a new device which he had developed during the day
for his motor. He could hardly wait to tell her, he had said. The news
was anything but joyful to her. She knew what it meant--she knew what
sums had been wasted on the other devices, involving losses which at
this time they could so little afford. She was glad, therefore, to free
her mind for the moment from these anxieties; glad to sit alone and
drink in the melodies that the quartette set free.

As she sat listening, beating time noiselessly with her thin, upraised
hand, her head resting quietly, a clear, silvery note--clear as a
bird's--leaped from Nathan's flute, soared higher and higher, trembled
like a lark poised in air, and died away in tones of such exquisite
sweetness that she turned her head in delight toward the group about
the piano, fixing her gaze on Nathan. The old man's eyes were riveted
on the score, his figure bent forward in the intensity of his
absorption, his whole face illumined with the ecstasy that possessed
him. Then she looked at Richard, standing with his back to her, his
violin tucked under his chin, his body swaying in rhythm with the
music. Unger sat next to him, his instrument between his knees, his
stolid, shiny face unruffled by the glorious harmonies of Beethoven.

Then her glance rested on Oliver. He was hanging over the piano
whispering in Miss Clendenning's ear, his face breaking into smiles at
her playful chidings. If the pathos of the melody had reached him he
showed no sign of its effects.

Instantly there welled up in her heart a sudden gush of tenderness--one
of those quick outbursts that often overwhelm a mother when her eyes
rest on a son whose heart is her own--an outburst all the more
intensified by the melody that thrilled her. Why should her heart have
been troubled? Here was her strong hope! Here was her chief reliance!
Here the hope of the future. How could she doubt or suffer when this
promise of the coming day was before her in all the beauty and strength
of his young manhood.

With the echoes of Nathan's flute still vibrating in her, and with her
mind filled with the delight of these fresh hopes, she suddenly
recalled the anxious look on her boy's face as he led Miss Clendenning
into the library--a new look--one she had never seen before. Still
under the quickening spell of the music she began to exaggerate its
cause. What had troubled him? Why had he told Lavinia, and not her? Was
there anything serious?--something he had kept from her to save her
pain?

From this moment her mind became absorbed in her boy. With restless,
impatient fingers she began thrumming on the arm of her chair. Oliver
would tell her, she knew, before many hours, but she could not
wait--she wanted to know at once.

With the ending of the first part of the overture, and before the two
gentlemen had laid down their instruments to grasp Unger's hands, she
called to Miss Clendenning, who sat at the piano alone, Oliver having
slipped away unobserved.

Miss Clendenning raised her eyes in answer. "Come over and sit by me,
dear, while the gentlemen rest."

Miss Clendenning picked up her white silk mits and fan lying beside the
candles, and moved toward the fireplace. Malachi saw her coming--he was
always in the room during the interludes--and with an alacrity common
to him when the distinguished little lady was present, drew up a low
chair beside his mistress and stood behind it until she took her seat.
Miss Clendenning smoothed out her skirt and settled herself with the
movement of a pigeon filling her nest. Then she laid her mits in her
lap and fanned herself softly.

"Well, Sallie, what is it? Did you ever hear Nathan play so well!" she
asked, at last.

"What did Oliver want, my dear?" replied Mrs. Horn, ignoring her
question. "Is there anything worrying him, or is Sue at the bottom of
it!"

The little woman smiled quizzically. "No, Sallie--not Sue--not this
time. That little rattle-brain's affections will only last the week
out. Nothing very important--that is, nothing urgent. We were talking
about the Tilghman portraits and the Lely that Cousin John has brought
into town from Claymore Manor, and what people should and should not do
to earn their living, and what professions were respectable. I thought
one thing and Ollie thought another. Now, what profession of all others
would you choose for a young man starting out in life?"

"What has he been telling you, Lavinia? Does he want to leave Judge
Ellicott's office?" Mrs. Horn asked, quietly, She always went straight
to the root of any matter.

"Just answer my question, Sallie."

"I'd rather he'd be a lawyer, of course; why?"

"Suppose he won't, or can't?"

"Is that what he told you, Lavinia, on the sofa?" She was leaning
forward, her cheek on her hand, her eyes fixed on the blazing logs.

"He told me a great many things, half of them boy's talk. Now answer my
question; suppose he couldn't study law because his heart wasn't in it,
what then?"

"I know, Lavinia, what you mean." There was an anxious tone now in the
mother's voice. "And Oliver talked to you about this?" As she spoke she
settled back in her chair and a slight sigh escaped her.

"Don't ask me, Sallie, for I'm not going to tell you. I want to know
for myself what you think, so that I can help the boy."

Mrs. Horn turned her head and looked toward Richard. She had suspected
as much from some hints that Judge Ellicott had dropped when she had
asked him about Oliver's progress. "He is still holding down his chair,
Madam." She thought at the time that it was one of the Judge's
witticisms, but she saw now that it had a deeper meaning. After some
moments she said, fixing her eyes on Miss Clendenning:

"Well, now, Lavinia, tell me what YOU think. I should like your
opinion. What would you wish to do with him if he were your son?"

Miss Lavinia smiled and her eyes half-closed. For a brief moment there
came to her the picture of what such a blessing would have been. Her
son! No! It was always somebody else's son or daughter to whom her
sympathy must go.

"Well, Sallie," she answered--she was leaning over now, her hands in
her lap, apparently with lowered eyelids, but really watching Mrs.
Horn's, face from the corner of her eye--"I don't think we can make a
clergyman out of him, do you?" Mrs. Horn frowned, but she did not
interrupt. "No, we cannot make a parson out of him. I meant, my love,
something in surplices, not in camp-meetings, of course. Think of those
lovely pink cheeks in a high collar and Bishop's sleeves, wouldn't he
be too sweet for anything?" and she laughed one of her little cooing
laughs. "Nor a doctor," she continued, with a slight interrogation in
her tone, "nor a shopkeeper, nor a painter"--and she shot a quick
glance from under her arching eyebrows at her companion--but Mrs.
Horn's face gave no sign--"nor a musician. Why not a musician, Sallie,
he sings like an angel, you know?" She was planting her shafts all
about the target, her eyes following the flight of each arrow.

Mrs. Horn raised her head and laid her hand firmly on Miss
Clendenning's wrist.

"We won't have him a shopkeeper, Lavinia," she said with some
positiveness, "nor a barber, nor a painter, nor a cook, nor a dentist.
We'll try and keep him a gentleman, my dear, whatever happens. As for
his being a musician, I think you will agree with me, that music is
only possible as an accomplishment, never when it is a profession. Look
at that dear old man over there"--and she pointed to Nathan, who was
bending forward running over on his flute some passages from the score,
his white hair covering his coat-collar behind--"so absolutely unfitted
for this world as he is, so purposeless, so hopelessly inert. He
breathes his whole soul into that flute and yet--"

"And a good deal comes out of it sometimes, my dear--to-night, for
instance," laughed Miss Lavinia. "Did you catch those bird-like notes?"

"Yes, and they thrilled me through and through, but sweet as they are
they haven't helped him make a career."

At this moment Richard called to Unger, who had been sitting on the
sofa in the library, "cooling off," he said, as he mopped his head with
a red handkerchief, one of Malachi's cups in his hand.

Miss Lavinia caught sight of the 'cellist's advancing figure and rose
from her seat. "I must go now," she said, "they want to play it again."
She moved a step forward, gave a glance at her side-curls in the oval
mirror over the mantel, stopped hesitatingly, and then bending over
Mrs. Horn said, thoughtfully, her hand on her companion's shoulder,
"Sallie, don't try to make water run uphill. If Ollie belonged to me
I'd let him follow his tastes, whatever they were. You'll spoil the
shape of his instep if you keep him wearing Chinese shoes," and she
floated over to join the group of musicians.

Mrs. Horn again settled herself in her chair. She understood now the
look on Oliver's face. She was right then; something was really
worrying him. The talk with Miss Lavinia had greatly disturbed her--.
so much so that she could not listen to the music. Again her eyes
rested on Oliver, who had come in and joined the group at the piano,
all out of breath with his second run across the Square--this time to
tell Sue of Miss Clendenning's promise. He was never happy unless he
was sharing what was on his mind with another, and if there was a girl
within reach he was sure to pour it into her willing ears.

Mrs. Horn looked at him with a pang about her heart. From which side of
the house had come this fickleness, this instability and love of change
in Oliver's character? she asked herself--a new interest every day--all
the traditions of his forefathers violated. How could she overcome it
in him? how make him more practical? Years before, when she had thought
him proud, she had sent him to market and had made him carry home the
basket on his arm, facing the boys who laughed at him. He had never
forgotten the lesson; he was neither proud nor lazy any more. But what
could she do in a situation like this?

Harassed by these doubts her eyes wandered over Oliver's slender,
well-knit muscular figure as he stood whispering to Miss Clendenning.
She noticed the fine, glossy hair brushed from the face and worn long
in the neck, curling behind the ears. She noted every movement of his
body: the graceful way in which he talked with his hands, using his
fingers to accentuate his words, and the way in which he shrugged his
shoulders--the shrug of a Frenchman, although not a drop of their blood
could be found in his veins--and in the quick lifting of the hand and
the sidelong glance of the eye, all so characteristic of Richard when
some new thought or theory reached his brain for the first time.
Gradually and unconsciously she began to compare each feature of
Oliver's face with that of the father who stood beside him: the alert
blue, eyes; overhanging brow and soft silkiness of the
hair--identically the name, even the way it lay in the neck. And again
she looked at Richard, drawing the bow as if in a dream.

Instantly a thought entered her mind that drove the blood from her
cheeks. These vacillations of her husband's! This turning from one
thing to another--first the law, then these inventions that never lead
anywhere, and now Oliver beginning in the same way, almost in the same
steps! Could these traits be handed down to the children? Would Oliver
be like Richard in----

Instinctively she stopped short before the disloyal thought could form
itself in her brain, straightened herself in her chair, and closed her
lips tight.

The music ceased; Nathan laid his flute on the piano; Unger rose from
his seat, and Richard turned to talk to Miss Clendenning. But she was
unmindful of it all--she still sat in her chair, her eyes searching the
blazing logs, her hands in her lap.

Only Malachi with his silver tray recalled her to consciousness.




CHAPTER III

THE OPEN-AIR DRAWING-ROOMS OF KENNIDY SQUARE


If in the long summer days Kennedy Square was haunted by the idle and
the weary, in the cool summer nights its dimly lighted paths were alive
with the tread of flying feet, and its shadowy benches gay with the
music of laughter and merry greetings.

With the going down of the sun, the sidewalks were sprinkled, and the
whole street about the Square watered from curb to curb, to cool its
sun-baked cobbles. The doors and windows of all the houses were thrown
wide to welcome the fresh night-air, laden with the perfume of
magnolia, jasmine, and sweet-smelling box. Easy-chairs and cushions
were brought out and placed on the clean steps of the porches, and the
wide piazzas covered with squares of china-matting to make ready for
the guests of the evening.

These guests would begin to gather as soon as the twilight settled; the
young girls in their pretty muslin frocks and ribbons, the young men in
white duck suits and straw hats. They thronged the cool, well-swept
paths, chattered in bunches under the big trees, or settled like birds
on the stone seats and benches. Every few minutes some new group, fresh
from their tea-tables, would emerge from one of the houses, poise like
a flock of pigeons on the top step, listen to the guiding sound of the
distant laughter, and then swoop down in mad frolic, settling in the
midst of the main covey, under the big sycamores until roused at the
signal of some male bird in a straw hat, or in answer to the call of
some bare-headed songstress from across the Square, the whole covey
would dash out one of the rickety gates, only to alight again on the
stone steps of a neighbor's porch, where their chatter and pipings
would last far into the night.

It was extraordinary how, from year to year, these young birds and even
the old ones remembered the best perches about the Square. On Colonel
Clayton's ample portico--big enough to shelter half a dozen covies
behind its honeysuckles--both young and old would settle side by side;
the younger bevy hovering about the Judge's blue-eyed daughter--a bird
so blithe and of so free a wing, that the flock always followed
wherever she alighted. On Judge Bowman's wide veranda only a few old
cocks from the club could be found, and not infrequently, some rare
birds from out of town perched about a table alive with the clink of
glass and rattle of crushed ice, while next the church, on old Mrs.
Pancoast's portico, with its tall Corinthian columns--Mr. Pancoast was
the archdeacon of the Noah's ark church--one or two old grandmothers
and a grave old owl of a family doctor were sure to fill the
rocking-chairs. As for Richard Horn's marble steps they were never free
from stray young couples who flew in to rest on Malachi's chairs and
cushions. Sometimes only one bird and her mate would be tucked away in
the shadow of the doorway; sometimes only an old pair, like Mrs. Horn
and Richard, would occupy its corners.

These porticoes and stone door-steps were really the open-air
drawing-rooms of Kennedy Square in the soft summer nights. Here ices
were served and cool drinks--sherbets for the young and juleps and
sherry cobblers for the old. At the Horn house, on great occasions, as
when some big melon that had lain for days on the cool cellar floor was
cut (it was worth a day's journey to see Malachi cut a melon), the
guests would not only crowd the steps, but all the hall and half up the
slender staircase, where they would sit with plates in their laps, the
young men serving their respective sweethearts.

This open-air night-life had gone on since Kennedy Square began; each
door-step had its habitues and each veranda its traditions. There was
but one single porch, in fact, facing its stately trees whereon no
flocks of birds, old or young, ever alighted, and that belonged to
Peter Skimmerton--the meanest man in town--who in a fit of parsimony
over candles, so the girls said, had bared his porch of every
protesting vine and had placed opposite his door-step a glaring street
gas-lamp---a monstrous and never-to-be-forgotten affront.

And yet, free and easy as the life was, no stranger sat himself down on
any one of these porches until his pedigree had been thoroughly
investigated, no matter how large might be his bank-account nor how
ambitious his soarings. No premeditated discourtesy ever initialed this
exclusiveness and none was ever intended. Kennedy Square did not know
the blood of the stranger--that was all--and not knowing it they could
not trust him. And it would have been altogether useless for him to try
to disguise his antecedents--especially if he came from their own
State--or any State south of it. His record could be as easily reached
and could be as clearly read as a title-deed. Even the servants knew.
Often they acted as Clerks of the Rolls.

"Dat Mister Jawlins, did you ask 'bout?" Malachi would say. "Why you
know whar he comes f'om. He's one o' dem Anne Rundle Jawlinses. He do
look mighty peart an' dey do say he's mighty rich, but he can't fool
Malachi. I knowed his gran'pa," and that wise and politic darky, with
the honor of the house before his eyes, would shake his head knowingly
and with such an ominous look, that had you not known the only crime of
the poor grandfather to have been a marriage with his overseer's
daughter--a very worthy woman, by the way--instead of with some lady of
quality, you would have supposed he had added the sin of murder to the
crime of low birth. On the other hand, had you asked Malachi about some
young aristocrat who had forgotten to count his toddies the night
before, that Defender of the Faith would have replied:

"Lawd bress ye! Co'se dese young gemmens like to frolic--an' dey do git
dat way sometimes--tain't nuthin'. Dem Dorseys was allers like dat--"
the very tones of his voice carrying such convictions of the young
man's respectability that you would have felt safe in keeping a place
at your table for the delinquent, despite your knowledge of his habits.

This general intimacy between the young people, and this absolute faith
of their elders in the quality of family blood, was one of the reasons
why every man about Kennedy Square was to be trusted with every other
man's sister, and why every mother gave the latch-key to every other
mother's son, and why it made no difference whether the young people
came home early or late, so that they all came home when the others
did. If there were love-making--and of course there was love-making--it
was of the old-fashioned, boy-and-girl kind, with keepsakes and pledges
and long walks in the afternoons and whispered secrets at the
merry-makings. Never anything else. Woe betide the swain who forgot
himself ever so slightly--there was no night-key for him after that,
nor would any of the girls on any front steps in town ever look his way
again when he passed--and to their credit be it said, few of the young
men either. From that day on the offender became a pariah. He had
committed the unpardonable sin.

As for these young men, this life with the girls was all the life they
knew. There were fishing parties, of course, at the "Falls" when the
gudgeons were biting, and picnics in the woods; and there were oyster
roasts in winter, and watermelon parties in summer--but the girls must
be present, too. For in those simple days there were no special clubs
with easy-chairs and convenient little tables loaded with drinkables
and smokables--none for the young Olivers, and certainly none for the
women. There was, to be sure, in every Southern city an old mausoleum
of a club--sometimes two--each more desolate than the other--haunted by
gouty old parties and bonvivants; but the young men never passed
through their doors except on some call of urgency. When a man was old
enough to be admitted to the club there was no young damosel on
Malachi's steps, or any other steps, who would care a rap about him.
HIS day was done.

For these were the days in which the woman ruled in court and
home---championed by loyal retainers who strove hourly to do her
bidding. Even the gray-haired men would tell you over their wine of
some rare woman whom they had known in their youth, and who was still
their standard of all that was gentle and gracious, and for whom they
would claim a charm of manner and stately comeliness that--"my dear
sir, not only illumined her drawing-room but conferred distinction on
the commonwealth."

"Mrs. Tilghman's mother, were you talking about?" Colonel Clayton or
Richard Horn, or some other old resident would ask. "I remember her
perfectly. We have rarely had a more adorable woman, sir. She was a
vision of beauty, and the pride of our State for years."

Should some shadow have settled upon any one of these homes--some
shadow of drunkenness, or love of play, or shattered brain, or
worse--the woman bore the sorrow in gentleness and patience and still
loved on and suffered and loved and suffered again, hoping against
hope. But no dry briefs were ever permitted to play a part, dividing
heart and hearth. Kennedy Square would have looked askance had such
things been suggested or even mentioned in its presence, and the dames
would have lowered their voices in discussing them. Even the men would
have passed with unlifted hats either party to such shame.

Because of this loyalty to womankind and this reverence for the home--a
reverence which began with the mother-love and radiated to every sister
they knew--no woman of quality ever earned her own bread while there
was an able-bodied man of her blood above ground to earn it for her.
Nor could there be any disgrace so lasting, even to the third and
fourth generation, as the stigma an outraged community would place upon
the renegade who refused her aid and comfort. An unprogressive,
quixotic life if you will--a life without growth and dominant
personalities and lofty responsibilities and God-given rights--but oh!
the sweet mothers that it gave us, and the wholesomeness, the
cleanliness, the loyalty of it all.


With the coming of summer, then, each white marble step of the Horn
mansion, under Malachi's care, shone like a china plate.

"Can't hab dese yere young ladies spile dere clean frocks on Malachi's
steps--no, sah," he would say; "Marse Oliver'd r'ar an' pitch tur'ble."

There were especial reasons this year for these extra touches of rag
and brush. Malachi knew "de signs" too well to be deceived. Pretty Sue
Clayton, with her soft eyes and the mass of ringlets that framed her
face, had now completely taken possession of Oliver's heart, and the
old servant already had been appointed chief of the postal service--two
letters a day sometimes with all the verbal messages in between.

This love-affair, which had begun in the winter, was not yet of so
serious a nature as to cause distress or unhappiness to either one of
their respective houses, nor had it reached a point where suicide or an
elopement were all that was left. It was, in truth, but a few months
old, and so far the banns had not been published. Within the last week
Miss Sue had been persuaded "to wait for him--" that was all. She had
not, it is true, burdened her gay young heart with the number of years
of her patience. She and Oliver were sweethearts--that was enough for
them both. As proof of it, was she not wearing about her neck at the
very moment a chain which he had fashioned for her out of
cherry-stones; and had she not given him in return one of those same
ringlets, and had she not tied it with a blue ribbon herself? And above
all--and what could be more conclusive--had she not taken her hair down
to do it, and let him select the very tress that pleased him best?--and
was not this curl, at that very moment, concealed in a pill-box and
safely hidden in his unlocked bureau-drawer, where his mother saw it
with a smile the last time she put away his linen? This love-affair--as
were the love-affairs of all the other young people--was common gossip
around Kennedy Square. Had there been any doubts about it, it would
only have been necessary to ask any old Malachi, or Hannah; or Juno.
They could have given every detail of the affair, descanting upon all
its joys and its sorrows.

Sweet girls of the days gone by, what crimes some of you have to answer
for! At least one of you must remember how my own thumb was cut into
slits over these same cherry-stones, and why the ends of your ringlets
were tucked away in a miniature box in my drawer, with the pressed
flowers and signet-ring, and the rest of it. And you could--if you
would--recall a waiting promise made to me years and years ago. And the
wedding! Surely you have not forgotten that. I was there, you
remember--but not as the groom.


On one particular evening in June--an evening that marked an important
stage in the development of Oliver's fortunes--the front porch, owing
to Malachi's attentions, was in spotless condition--steps, knocker, and
round silver knobs.

Sue and Oliver sat on the top step; they had stolen across from the
Clayton porch on some pretended errand. Sue's chin was in her hand, and
Oliver sat beside her pouring out his heart as he had never done
before. He had realized long ago that she could never understand his
wanting to be a painter as Miss Clendenning had done, and so he had
never referred to it since the night of the musicale, when he had raced
across the Square to tell her of his talk with the little lady. Sue, as
he remembered afterward, had listened abstractedly. She would have
preferred at the time his running in to talk about herself rather than
about his queer ambitions. She was no more interested now.

"Ollie, what does your father say about all this?" she finally asked in
a perfunctory way. "Would he be willing for you to be a painter?" It
bored her to listen to Oliver's enthusiastic talk about light and
shade, and color and perspective, and what Mr. Crocker had said and
what Mr. Crocker was doing, and what Mr. Crocker's last portrait was
like. She was sure that nobody else around Kennedy Square talked of
such things or had such curious ambitions. They shocked her as much as
Oliver's wearing some outlandish clothes would have done--making him
conspicuous and, perhaps, an object of ridicule.

"Father's all right, Sue. He's always right," Oliver answered. "He
believes in Mr. Crocker, just as he believes in a lot of things that a
good many people around here don't understand. He believes the time
will come when they will value his pictures, and be proud to own them.
But I don't care who owns mine; I just want the fun of painting them.
Just think of what a man can do with a few tubes of color, a brush, and
a bit of canvas. So I don't care if they never buy what I paint. I can
get along somehow, just as Mr. Crocker does. He's poor, but just see
how happy he is. Why, when he does a good thing he's nothing but a boy,
he's so glad about it. I always know how his work has gone when I see
his face."

"But, Ollie, he's so shabby, and his daughter gives music-lessons.
Nobody THINKS of inviting her anywhere." Sue's eyes were shut tight,
with an expression of assumed contempt, and her little nose was
straight up.

"Yes--but that doesn't hurt his pictures, Sue." There was a slight
trace of impatience in Oliver's tone.

"Well, perhaps it doesn't--but you don't want to be like him. I
wouldn't like to see you, Ollie, going about with a picture under your
arm that everybody knew you had painted yourself. And suppose that they
would want to buy your pictures? How would you feel now to be taking
other people's money for things you had painted?"

The boy caught his breath. It seemed useless to pursue the talk with
Sue. She evidently had no sympathy with his aspirations.

"No--but I wish I could paint as he does," he answered, mechanically.

Sue saw the change in his manner. She realized, too, that she had hurt
him in some way. She drew nearer and put her hand on his arm.

"Why, you can, Ollie. You can do anything you want to; Miss Lavinia
told me so." The little witch was mistress of one art--that of holding
her lover--but that was an art of which all the girls about Kennedy
Square approved.

"No, I can't," he replied, forgetting in the caressing touch of her
hand the tribute to his ability, and delighted that she was once more
in sympathy with him. "Mother wouldn't think of my being an artist. She
doesn't understand how I feel about it, and Miss Lavinia, somehow,
doesn't seem to be favorable to it either. I've talked to her lots of
times--she was more encouraging at first, but she doesn't seem to like
the idea now. I've been hoping she'd fix it so I could speak to mother
about it. Now she tells me I had better wait. I can't see why Miss
Lavinia knows what an artist's life can be, for she knew plenty of
painters when she was in London with her father, and she loves
pictures, too, and is a good judge--nobody here any better. She told me
only a week ago how much one of these Englishmen was paid for a little
thing as big as your hand, but I've forgotten the amount. I don't see
why I can't paint as well as those fellows. Do you know, Sue, I'm
beginning to think that about half the people in Kennedy Square are
asleep? They really don't seem to think there is anything respectable
but the law. If they are right, how about all the men who painted the
great pictures and built all the cathedrals, or the men who wrote all
the poems and histories? Mother, of course, wants me to be a lawyer.
Because I'm fitted for it?--not a bit of it! Simply because father was
one before me and his father before him, and Uncle John Tilghman
another, and so on back to the deluge."

Sue drew away a little and turned her head toward the Square as if in
search of someone. Oliver noticed the movement and his heart sank
again. He saw but too clearly how little impression the story of his
ambitions had made upon her. Then the thought flashed into his mind
that he might have offended her in some way, clashing against her
traditions and her prejudices as he had done. He bent toward her and
laid his hand in hers.

"Little girl," he said, in a softened tone, "I can't make you unhappy,
too. Mother is enough for me to worry about--I haven't talked it all
out to you before, but don't you get a wrong idea of what I'm going to
do--" and he looked up into her face and tightened his hold upon her
fingers, his eyes never wavering from her own.

The girl allowed his hand to remain an instant, then quickly withdrew
her own and started up. Coyness is sometimes fear in the timid heart
that is stepping into the charmed circle for the first time.

"There goes Ella Dorsey and Jack--" she cried, springing down the
steps. "Ella! El--la!" and an answering halloo came back, and the two
started from Malachi's steps and raced up the street to join their
young friends.




CHAPTER IV

AN OLD-FASHIONED MORTGAGE


Pretty Sue Clayton with her ringlets and rosy cheeks had not been
Oliver's only listener.

His mother had been sitting inside the drawing-room, just beside the
open window. She had spoken to Sue and Oliver when they first mounted
the steps, and had begged them both to come in, but they had forgotten
her presence. Unintentionally, therefore, she had heard every word of
the conversation. Her old fears rushed over her again with renewed
force. She had never for a moment supposed that Oliver wanted to be a
painter--like Mr. Crocker! Now at last she understood his real object
in talking to Lavinia the night of the musical.

"Richard," she called softly to her husband sitting in the adjoining
room, in the chair that Malachi, in accordance with the old custom, had
with his sweeping bow made ready for him. The inventor had been there
since tea was over, lying back in his seat, his head resting on his
hand. He had had one of his thoughtful days, worrying over some detail
of his machine, still incomplete. The new device of which he had told
her with such glee had failed, as had the others. The motor was still
incomplete.

"Richard," she repeated.

"Yes, my dear," he answered, in his gentle voice. He had not heard her
at first.

"Bring your chair over here."

The inventor rose instantly and, crossing the room, took a seat beside
her, his hand finding hers in the dark.

"What is this you have been saying to Oliver about artists being great
men?" she asked. "He's got a new idea in his head now--he wants to be a
painter. I've thought for some time that Mr. Crocker was not a proper
person for him to be so much with. He has evidently worked on the boy's
imagination until he has determined to give up the law and study art."

"How do you know?"

"I've just heard him tell Sue Clayton so. All he wants now is my
consent--he says he has yours."

The inventor paused, and gently smoothed his wife's fingers with his
own.

"And you would not give it?" he inquired.

"How could I? It would ruin him--don't you know it?" There was a slight
tinge of annoyance in her voice--not one of fault-finding, but rather
of anxiety.

"That depends, my dear, on how well he could succeed," he answered,
gently.

"Why, Richard!" She withdrew her hand quickly from his caressing touch,
and looked at him in undisguised astonishment. "What has his SUCCEEDING
to do with it? Surely you cannot be in earnest? I am willing he should
do anything to make his living, but not that. No one we know has ever
been a painter. It is neither respectable nor profitable. You see what
a dreadful existence Mr. Crocker leads--hardly an associate in town,
and no acquaintances for his daughter, and he's been painting ever
since he was a boy. Oliver could not earn a penny at such work."

"Money is not everything, my dear, nor social recognition. There are
many things I would value more."

"What are they?" She was facing him now, her brows knit, a marked
antagonism in her voice.

"Good manners and good taste, Sallie, and kindly consideration for
another's feelings," he answered. He spoke calmly and kindly, as was
his custom. He had lived almost all his life with this high-strung
Sallie Horn, whose eyes flashed now and then as they had done in the
old days when he won her hand. He knew every side of her temperament.
"Good manners, and good taste"--he repeated, as if wishing to emphasize
his thoughts--"Oliver has all of these, and he has, besides, loyalty to
his friends. He never speaks of Mr. Crocker but with affection, and I
love to hear him. That man is an artist of great talent, and yet it
seems to be the fashion in this town to ridicule him. If Ollie has any
gifts which would fit him to be a painter, I should be delighted to see
him a painter. It is a profession despised now, as are many others, but
it is the profession of a gentleman, for all they say, and a noble
one!" Then he stopped and said, thoughtfully, as if communing with
himself--"I wish he could be a painter. Since Gilbert Stuart's time we
have had so few men of whom we can boast. This country will one day be
proud to honor her artists."

Mrs. Horn sank back in her chair. She felt the hopelessness of all
further discussion with her husband. "He would not have talked this way
ten years ago," she said to herself. "Everything has gone wrong since
he left the law." But to her husband she said:

"You always measure everything by your hopes, Richard, and you never
look at the practical side of anything. Ollie is old enough to begin to
think how he will earn his bread. I see now how hopeless it is for us
to try and make a lawyer of him--his heart is not in it. I have come
little by little to the conclusion that what he wants most is hard
work, and he wants it right away, just as soon as we can find something
for him to do--something with his hands, if necessary, not something
full of dreams and imaginings," and her voice rose in its earnestness.
"I am getting more and more anxious about him every day," she added,
suddenly controlling herself, "and when you encourage him in foolish
vagaries you only make it harder for me, dear," and her voice softened
and broke with emotion.

"He ought to have gone into the laboratory, Sallie," Richard added
quickly, in a reflective tone--laying his hand on her shoulder as he
noticed the change of voice--"just as I wanted him to do when he left
school. There is a future for scientific men in this country which you
do not see--a future which few around me seem to see. Great changes are
coming, not only in science, but in the arts and in all useful
knowledge. If Ollie can add to the brilliancy of this future by
becoming a brilliant painter, able to help educate those about him,
there could be no higher calling for him. Three things are coming, my
dear--perhaps four." The inventor had risen from his seat and stood
beside her, his eyes turned away into the dark as if he were addressing
some unseen person. "The superseding of steam, aerial locomotion, and
the education of the common people, black and white. One other may
come--the freeing of the slaves--but the others are sure. Science, not
money, nor family traditions, nor questions of birth, will shape the
destinies of the country. We may not live to see it, but Oliver will,
and I want him to be where he can help on the movement. You were
opposed to his becoming a scientist, and I feel assured made a mistake.
Don't stand in his way again, dear."

"Yes, Richard, I was opposed to it, because I did not want him to waste
his time over all sorts of foolish experiments, which would
certainly--" She did not finish the sentence. Her anxiety had not yet
gone as far as that. With a quick gesture she rose from her chair and
drawing her white gossamer shawl about her shoulders--left the room and
walked out onto the front steps, followed by Richard.

If the inventor heard the thrust he did not reply. He would not argue
with his wife over it, nor did it check the flow of his courtesy. She
had never seen the value of what he was striving for, but she would in
time he knew.

"Yes, I think it is cooler out here," was all he said, as he placed a
cushion to soften her seat on the threshold. When he had arranged
another pillow behind her back and hunted round the dark parlor for a
stool for her feet, he found a chair for himself and sat down beside
her. She thanked him, but her thoughts were evidently far away. She was
weighing in her mind what must be her next move if Oliver persisted in
this new departure. Richard broke the silence.

"I haven't told you of the good offer I've had for the farm, Sallie."

"No, but we're not going to sell it, of course." She was leaning back
against the jamb of the door as she spoke, the shawl hanging loose, her
delicate white hands in her lap. It was an idle answer to an idle
question, for her mind was still with Oliver.

"Well, I hadn't thought of doing so until to-day," he answered, slowly,
"but I had a notice from the bank that they must call in the mortgage,
and so I thought I might as well sell the whole place, pay off the
debt, and use the balance for--"

"Sell the farm, Richard?" It was her hand now that sought his, and with
a firm grasp as if she would restrain him then and there in his purpose.

"Yes, I can get several thousand dollars over and above the mortgage,
and I need the money, Sallie. It will only be a temporary matter--" and
he smoothed her arm tenderly, speaking as a lover of long standing
might do who is less absorbed with the caress than with the subject
under discussion. "The motor will be ready in a few weeks--as soon as
the new batteries are finished. Then, my dear, you won't have to
curtail your expenses as you have done." His voice was full of hope
now, a smile lighting his face as he thought of all the pleasure and
comfort his success would bring her.

"But you said that same thing when you were working on the steam-valve,
for which you put that very mortgage on the farm, and now that's all
gone and--"

"The failure of the steam-valve, as I have always told you, was due to
my own carelessness, Sallie. I should have patented it sooner. They are
making enormous sums on it, I hear, and are using my cut-off, and I
think dishonestly. But the motor has been protected at every new step
that I have taken. My first patent of August 13, 1856, supersedes all
others, and cannot be shaken. Now, my dear, don't worry about it--you
have never known me to fail, and I won't now. Besides, you forget my
successes, Sallie--the turbine water-wheel and the others. It will all
come, right."

"It will never come right." She had risen from her seat, and was
standing over, him, both hands on his shoulders, her eyes looking down
into his, her voice trembling. "Oh, Richard, Richard! Give up this life
of dreams you are living, and go back to your law-office. You always
succeeded in the law. This new career of yours is ruining us. I can
economize, dear, just as I have always done," she added, with another
sudden change of tone, bending over him and slipping her hand
caressingly into his. "I will do everything to help you. I did not mean
to be cross a moment ago. I was worried about Oliver's talk. I have
been silent so long--I must speak. Don't be angry, dear, but you must
keep the farm. I will go myself and see about the mortgage at the
bank--we cannot--we must not; go on this way--we will have nothing
left."

He patted her arm again in his gentle way--not to calm her fears, he
knew so well that she was wrong, but to quiet the nerves that he
thought unstrung.

"But I need this extra money for some improvements which I--"

"Yes, I know you THINK so, but you don't, Richard, you don't? For
Heaven's sake, throw the motor out into the street, and be done with
it. It will ruin us all if things go on as they have done."

The inventor raised his eyes quickly. He had never seen her so
disturbed in all their married life. She had never spoken in this way
before.

"Don't excite yourself, Sallie," he said, gravely, and with a certain
air of authority in his manner. "You'll bring on one of your
headaches--it will all come right. Come, my dear, let us go into the
house. People are passing, and will wonder."

She followed him back into the drawing-room, his hand still held fast
in hers.

"Promise me one thing," she said, stopping at the door and looking up
into his eyes, "and I won't say another word. Please do nothing more
about the farm unless you let me know. Let me think first how I can
help. It will all come out right, as you say, but it will be because we
will make it come right, dear." She drew his face down toward her with
one hand and kissed him tenderly on his cheek. Then she bade him
good-night and resumed her seat by the window, to watch for Oliver's
return.

Try as she would, she could not banish her fears. The news of Richard's
intention to pay off the loan by selling the farm had sent a shudder
through her heart such as she had never before experienced, for that
which she had dreaded had come to pass. Loyal as she had always been to
her husband, and proud as she was of his genius and accomplishments,
and sympathetic as they were in all else that their lives touched upon,
her keen, penetrating mind had long since divined the principal fault
that lay at the bottom of her husband's genius. She saw that the weak
point in his make-up was not his inventive quality, but his inability
to realize any practical results from his inventions when perfected.
She saw, too, with equal certainty how rapidly their already slender
means were being daily depleted in costly experiments--many of which
were abandoned as soon as tried, and she knew full well that the end
was but a question of time. Even when he had abandoned the law, and had
exchanged his office near the Court-house for his shop in the back
yard, and had given his library to his young students, she had not
despaired; she still had faith in his genius.

She had first become uneasy when the new steam cut-off had failed to
reimburse him. When this catastrophe was followed by his losing every
dollar of his interest in the improved cotton-gin, because of his
generosity to a brother inventor, her uneasiness had become the keenest
anxiety. And now here was this new motor, in which he seemed more
absorbed than in any other of his inventions. This was to plunge them
into still greater difficulties and jeopardize even the farm.

Richard had not been disturbed by it all. Serene and hopeful always,
the money question had counted for nothing with him. His compensation
lay in the fact that his theories had been proved true. More-over,
there were, he knew, other inventions ahead, and more important
discoveries to be made. If money were necessary, these new inventions
would supply it. Such indifference to practical questions was an agony
to one of her temperament, burdened as she was by the thought of their
increasing daily expenses, the magnitude of which Richard never seemed
to appreciate.

And yet until to-night, when Richard had made his announcement about
the mortgage, she had made no protest, uttered no word of censure.
Neither had any jar or discord ever disturbed the sweet harmony of
their home-life. And she had only behaved as any other wife in Kennedy
Square would have done in like circumstances. Remonstrances against a
husband's business methods were never made in the best families. In his
own house Richard was master. So she had suffered on and held her
peace, while Richard walked with his head in the clouds, unconscious of
her doubts. The situation must now be met, and she determined to face
it with all her might. "The farm shall not be sacrificed, if I can help
it," she kept repeating to herself; "any economy is better than that
disaster."

When at last the shock of the news of the threatened disaster had
passed, and she had regained her customary composure, she decided to
act at once and at head-quarters, outside of Richard's help or
knowledge. She would send for Colonel Clayton, one of the directors of
the bank, in the morning, and see what could be done to postpone for a
time the bank's action. This would give her time to think what next
could best be done to save the property. This settled in her mind, she
gave herself up to the more important and pressing need of the
moment--the dissuading of Oliver from this new act of folly.

At the end of an hour she was still sitting by the drawing-room window,
straining her eyes across the Square, noting every figure that passed
into the radiance of the moonlight, her mind becoming clearer as her
indomitable will, which had never failed her in domestic crises, began
to assert itself.

When her eye fell at last upon her son, he was walking with swinging
gait up the long path across the Square, whistling as he came, his
straw hat tilted on one side, his short coat flying free. He had taken
Sue home, and the two had sat on her father's steps in the moonlight
long after the other boys and girls had scattered to their homes. The
Colonel had come in while they were talking, and had bade them
good-night and gone up to bed.

Girl as she was, Sue already possessed that subtle power of unconscious
coquetry which has distinguished all the other Sue Claytons of all the
other Kennedy Squares the South over since the days of Pocahontas. She
had kept Oliver's mind away from the subject that engrossed him, and on
herself; and when, at last, standing between the big columns of the
portico she had waved her hand, good-night, and had gained his promise
to stop in the morning on his way to the office, for just another word,
she felt sure that his every thought was of her. Then she had closed
the big front door--she was the last person in the house awake--and
tripped upstairs, not lighting her candle until she had peeped through
her shutters, and had found him standing on the other side of the
street looking toward the house. He made a handsome picture of a lover,
as he stood in the moonlight, and Sue smiled complacently to herself at
the delicate attention paid her, but Oliver's eyes, the scribe is
ashamed to say, were not fixed on the particular pair of green blinds
that concealed this adorable young lady, certainly not with any desire
to break through their privacy. One of the unforgivable sins--nay, one
of the impossible sins--about Kennedy Square would have been to have
recognized a lady who looked, even during the daytime, out from a
bedroom window: much less at night. That was why Sue did not open her
blinds.

Nor, indeed, was Oliver occupied with the question of Sue's blinds at
all. He had for the moment in fact completely forgotten the existence
of his lady-love. He was, if the truth must be told, studying the
wonderful effect of the white light of the moon flooding with its
radiance the columns and roof of the Clayton house, the dark magnolias
silhouetted against the flight of steps and the indigo-blue of the sky.
He had already formulated in his mind the palette with which he would
paint it, and had decided that the magnolias were blue-black and not
green, and the steps greenish-white. He had, furthermore, determined to
make an outline of it in the daylight, and talk to Mr. Crocker about
it. Sue's eyes, which but a moment before had so charmed him, no longer
lingered in his memory--nor even in any one of the far corners of his
head and heart. It was only when her light flashed up that he awoke to
the realization of what he was doing, and even this breach of good
manners was forgotten by him in his delight over the effect which the
red glow of the candle gave to the whole composition.

With the picture clearly stamped upon his brain, he turned and stepped
quickly across the Square, and in another moment he had thrown his
mother a kiss through the window, and rushing inside had caught her in
his arms.

"Poor motherkins--and you all alone," he cried. "Why, I thought you and
father had gone to bed long ago."

"No, son--I was waiting for you." He laid his fresh young face against
hers, insisting that she must go to bed at once; helping her upstairs
awkwardly, laughing as he went--telling her she was the sweetest girl
he ever knew and his best sweetheart--kissing her pale cheeks as they
climbed the steps together to his room.

She had determined, as she sat by the window, to talk to him of what
she had overheard him say to Sue, and of her anxiety over Richard's
revelations, but his joyous kiss had robbed her of the power. She would
wait for another time--she said to herself--not to-night, when he was
so happy.

"Anybody at Sue's, Ollie?" she asked, lighting his candle.

"Only the boys and girls--Tom Pitts, Charley Bowman, Nellie Talbot, and
one or two others. The Colonel came in just before I left."

"But the Colonel will be home to-morrow, will he not?" she asked,
quickly, as if something forgotten had been suddenly remembered.

"Yes--think so--" answered Oliver, taking off his coat and hanging it
over the chair--"because he was just up from Pongateague. He and Major
Pitts got thirty-seven woodcock in two days. Tom wants me to go down
with him some day next week."

A shade of anxiety crossed the mother's face.

"What did you tell him, son?" She moved a chair nearer the bureau and
sat down to watch him undress, as she had always done since the day she
first tucked him into his crib.

"Oh, I said I would ask you." He was loosening his cravat, his chin
thrown up, the light of the candle falling over his well-knit shoulders
and chest outlined through his white shirt.

"Better not go, Ollie--you've been away so much lately."

"Oh, dearie," he protested, in a tone as a child would have done, "what
does a day or two matter? Be a darling old mother and let me go. Tom
has a gun for me, and Mr. Talbot is going to lend us his red setter.
Tom's sister is going, too, and so are her cousins. Just think, now, I
haven't had a day in the country for a coon's age." His arms were round
her neck now. He seemed happier over the excuse to caress her than
anxious about her possible refusal.

She loosened one of his hands and laid it on her cheek.

"No holidays, son? Why you had two last week, when you all went out to
Stemmer's Run," she said, looking up into his face, his hand still in
hers.

"Yes, but that was fishing!" he laughed as he waved an imaginary rod in
his hands.

"And the week before, when you spent the day at Uncle Tilghman's?" she
continued, smiling sadly at him, but with the light of an ill-concealed
admiration on her face.

"Ah, but mother, I went to see the Lely! That's an education. Oh, that
portrait in pink!" He was serious now, looking straight down into her
eyes--talking with his hands, one thumb in air as if it were a bit of
charcoal and he was outlining the Lely on an equally real canvas. "Such
color, mother--such an exquisite poise of the head and sweep to the
shoulder--" and the thumb described a curve in the air as if following
every turn of Lely's brush.

Her eyes followed his gestures--she loved his enthusiasm, although she
wished it had been about something else.

"And you don't get any education out of the Judge's law-books?"

"No, I wish I did." The joyous look on his face was gone now--his hand
had fallen to his side. "It gets to be more of a muddle every day--"
and then he added, with the illogical reasoning of youth--"all the
lawyers that ever lived couldn't paint a picture like the Lely."

Mrs. Horn closed her eyes. It was on her tongue to tell him she knew
what was in his heart, but she stopped; no, not to-night, she said
firmly to herself, and shut her lips tight--a way she had of bracing
her nerves in such emergencies.

Oliver in turn saw the expression of anxiety that crossed his mother's
face and the thin drawn line of the lips. One word from her and he
would have poured out his heart. Then some shadow that crossed her face
silenced him. "No, not to-night--" he said to himself. "She has been
sitting up for me and is tired--I'll tell her to-morrow."

"Don't go with Tom Pitts, my son," she said, calmly. "I'd rather you'd
stay; I don't want you to go this time. Perhaps a little later--" and a
slight shiver went through her as she rose from her chair and moved
toward him.

He made no protest. Her final word was always law to him--not because
she dominated him, but because his nature was always to be in harmony
with the thing he loved. Because, too, underneath it all was that
quality of tenderness to all women old and young, which forbade him to
cause one of them pain. Almost unconsciously to himself he had gone
through a process by which from having yielded her the obedience of a
child, he now surrendered to her the pleasures of his youth when the
old feeling of maternal dominance still controlled her in her attitude
to him. She did not recognize the difference, and he had but
half-perceived it, but the difference had already transformed him from
a boy into a man, though with unrecognized powers of stability as yet.
In obeying his mother, then at twenty-two, or even in meeting the whims
and conceits of his sweethearts, this quality of tenderness to the
woman was always uppermost in his heart. The surrender of a moment's
pleasure seemed so little to him compared to the expression of pain he
could see cross their faces. He had so much to make him happy--what
mattered it if out of a life so full he should give up any one thing to
please his mother.

Patting him on the cheek and kissing him on the neck, as she had so
often done when some sudden wave of affection overwhelmed her, she bade
him good-night at last.

Once outside in the old-fashioned hall, she stopped for a moment, her
eyes fixed on the floor, the light from the hall-lamp shining on her
silver hair and the shawl about her shoulders, and said slowly to
herself, as if counting each word:

"What--can I do--to save this boy--from--himself?"




CHAPTER V

A MESSAGE OF IMPORTANCE


Richard, when he waked, made no allusion to the mortgage nor to his
promise the night before, to take no steps in the matter without her
consent, nor could Mrs. Horn see that the inventor had given the
subject further thought. He came in to breakfast with his usual
serenity of mien, kissed her gallantly on the cheek--in all their
married life this dear old gentleman had never forgotten this breakfast
kiss--and taking his seat opposite her, he picked up the new Scientific
Review, just in by the morning mail, and began cutting the leaves. She
tried to draw him into conversation by asking him when the note on the
mortgage was due, but his mind was doubtless absorbed by some problem
suggested by the Review before him, for without answering--he, of
course, had not heard her--he rose from his chair, excused himself for
a moment, opened a book in his library, studied it leisurely, and only
resumed his seat when Malachi gently touched his elbow and said:

"Coffee purty nigh done sp'ilt, Marse Richard."

Breakfast over, Richard picked up his letters, and with that far-away
look in his eyes which his wife knew so well, walked to the closet,
took down his long red calico gown, slipped it over his coat, and with
a loving pat on his wife's shoulder as he passed, and with the request
that no one but Nathan should see him that morning, made his way
through the damp brick-paved back yard to the green door of his "li'l"
room.

Mrs. Horn watched his retreating figure from the window--his head bent,
his soft hair stirred by the morning air, falling about his shoulders.
His serenity; his air of abstraction; of being wrapped in the clouds as
it were--borne aloft by the power of a thought altogether beyond her,
baffled her as it always did. She could not follow his flights when he
was in one of these uplifted moods. She could only watch and wait until
he returned again to the common ground of their daily love and
companionship.

Brushing a quick tear from her eyes with an impatient sigh, she
directed Malachi to go to Oliver's room and tell him he must get up at
once, as she wanted him to carry a message of importance. She had
herself rapped at her son's door as she passed on her way downstairs,
and Malachi had already paid two visits to the same portal--one with
Oliver's shoes and one on his own account. He had seen his mistress's
anxiety, and knowing that his young master had come in late the night
before, had mistaken the cause, charging Mrs. Horn's perturbation to
Oliver's account. The only response Oliver had made to either of his
warnings had been a smothered yawn and a protest at being called at
daylight. On his third visit Malachi was more insistent, the hall-clock
by that time having struck nine.

"Ain't you out'en dat bed yit, Marse Oliver? Dis yere's de third time I
been yere. Better git up; yo' ma's gittin' onres'less."

"Coming, Mally. Tell mother I'll be down right away," called Oliver,
springing out of bed. Malachi stepped softly downstairs again, bowed
low to his mistress, and with a perfectly straight face said:

"He's mos' ready, mistis. Jes' a-breshin' ob his ha'r when I opened de
do'. Spec' Marse Oliver overslep' hisse'f, or maybe nobody ain't call
him--"

He could not bear to hear the boy scolded. He had begun to shield his
young master in the days when he carried him on his shoulder, and he
would still shade the truth for him whenever he considered necessity
required it.

When Oliver at last came downstairs it was by means of the hand-rail as
a slide, a dash through the hall and a bound into the breakfast-room,
followed by a joyous good-morning, meeting his mother's "How could you
be so late, my boy," without any defence of his conduct, putting one
hand under her chin and the other around her neck, and kissing her
where her white hair parted over her forehead.

Malachi waited an instant, breathing freer when he found that his
statement regarding Oliver's toilet had passed muster, and then
shuffled off to the kitchen for hot waffles and certain other
comforting viands that Aunt Hannah, the cook, had kept hot for her
young master, Malachi's several reports having confirmed her suspicions
that Oliver, as usual, would be half an hour late.

"What a morning, motherkins," Oliver cried. "Such a sky, all china-blue
and white. Oh, you just ought to see how fine the old church looms up
behind the trees. I'm going to paint that some day, from my window. Dad
had his breakfast?" and he glanced at the empty seat and plate.
"Sausage, eh? Mally, got any for me?" and he dragged up his chair
beside her, talking all the time as he spread his napkin and drew the
dishes toward him.

He never once noticed her anxious face, he was so full of his own
buoyant happiness. She did not check his enthusiasm. This
breakfast-hour alone with her boy--he was almost always later than
Richard--was the happiest of the day. But her heart was too heavy this
morning to enjoy it. Instead of listening with her smile of quiet
satisfaction, answering him now and then with a gayety of humor which
matched his own, she was conscious only of the waiting for an
opportunity to break into his talk with out jarring upon his mood. At
last, with a hesitating emphasis that would have alarmed anyone less
wrapped in his own content than her son, she said:

"Ollie, when you finish your breakfast I want you, on your way to Judge
Ellicott's office, to stop at Colonel Clayton's and ask him to be good
enough to come and see me as soon as he can on a little matter of
business. Tell him I will keep him but a minute. If you hurry, my son,
you'll catch him before he leaves the house."

The die was cast now. She had taken her first step without Richard's
hand to guide her--the first in all her life. It was pain to do it--the
more exquisite because she loved to turn to him for guidance or relief,
to feel the sense of his protection. Heretofore he had helped her in
every domestic emergency, his soft, gentle hand soothing and quieting
her, when troubles arose. She had wavered during the night between her
duty to her family in saving the farm, and her duty to her husband in
preserving unbroken the tie of loyal dependence that had always bound
them together. Many emotions had shaken her as she lay awake, her eyes
fixed on the flutings in the canopy of the high-post bedstead which the
night-lamp faintly illumined, Richard asleep beside her, dreaming
doubtless of cogs and pulleys and for the hundredth time of his finding
the one connecting link needed to complete the chain of his success.

But before the day had broken, her keen, penetrating mind had cut
through the fog of her doubts. Come what may, the farm should never be
given up. Richard, for all his urgent need of money to perfect his new
motor, should not be allowed to sacrifice this the only piece of landed
property which they possessed, except the roof that sheltered them all.
The farm saved, she would give her attention to Oliver's future career.
On one point her mind was firmly made up--he should never, in spite of
what his father said, become a painter.

Oliver hurried through his breakfast, cut short Malachi's second relay
of waffles to the great disappointment of that excellent servitor, and
with his mother's message for the moment firmly fixed in his mind,
tilted his hat on one side of his head and started across Kennedy
Square, whistling as he went.

Mrs. Horn moved her seat to the window and looked out upon the
brick-paved yard. The door of the shop was shut. Richard was already at
work, for a thin curl of blue smoke was rising from the chimney. As she
sat looking out upon the tulip-tree and the ivy-covered wall beyond, a
strange, unaccountable sense of loneliness new in her experience came
over her. The lines about her mouth settled more firmly, and the
anxious look that had filled her eyes changed to one of determination.

"Nobody can help," she said to herself with a sigh. "I must do it all
myself;" and picking up her basket of keys she mounted slowly to her
room.

Once outside the front door, with the fresh, clear air stirring to a
silver-white the leaves of the maples, the birds singing in the
branches and the sky glistening overhead, one of those sudden changes
of mood to which our young hero was subject swept over him. The picture
of the dear mother whom he loved and whose anxious face had at last
filled his thoughts, by some shifting of the gray matter of this
volatile young gentleman's brain had suddenly become replaced by
another.

Pretty Sue Clayton, her black eyes snapping with fun, her hand so soon
to be outstretched in welcome, was now the dominating figure in his
mental horizon. Even Sir Peter Lely's girl in pink and the woodcock
shooting with Tom Pitts, and all the other delights that had filled his
brain had become things of the past as he thought of Sue's greeting.
For the time being this black-eyed little witch with the ringlets about
her face had complete possession of him.

He had not thought of her, it is true, for five consecutive minutes
since he had bidden her good-night ten hours ago; and he would, I am
quite sure, have forgotten even his promise to see her this morning had
not his mother's message made his going to her house imperative. And
yet, now that the prospect of having a glimpse of her face was assured,
he could hardly wait until he reached her side.

Not that he had some new thing to tell her--something that had bubbled
up fresh from the depths of his heart over-night. Indeed, had that
portion of this young gentleman's anatomy been searched with a dark
lantern, it can safely be said that not the slightest suggestion of
this fair inamorata's form or lineaments would have been found lurking
in any one of its recesses. Furthermore, I can state positively--and I
knew this young gentleman quite well at the time--that it was not Sue
at all that he longed for at this precise moment, even though he
hurried to meet her. It was more the WOMAN IN HER--the something that
satisfied his inner nature when he was with her--her coy touches of
confidence, her artless outbursts of admiration, looking up in his face
as she spoke, the dimples playing about the corners of her mouth. He
revelled in all those subtle flatteries and cajoleries, and in all the
arts to please of which she was past mistress. He loved to believe
her--she intended that he should--when she told him how different he
was from anybody about Kennedy Square, and how nobody swam or rode or
danced as he did; nor wore their hair so becomingly, nor their
clothes--especially the gray jacket buttoned up close under the chin,
not carried themselves as they walked; nor--

Why go on? We all know exactly how she said it, and how sincere she
seemed, and how we believed it all (and do now, some of us), and how
blissful it was to sit beside her and hear her voice and know that this
most adorable of women really believed that the very sun itself rose
and set in our own adorable persons.

Because of all this and of many other things with which we have nothing
to do, our young hero saw only Sue's eyes when that maiden, who had
been watching for him at the library window, laid her hand on the lapel
of his coat in her coaxing way. No wonder he had forgotten everything
which his mother had asked him to do. I can forgive him under the
circumstances--and so can you. Soft hands are very beguiling,
sometimes--and half-closed lids--Well! It is a good many years ago, but
there are some things that none of us ever forget.

Blinded by such fascinations it is not at all astonishing that long
before Oliver regained his senses the Colonel had left the house for
the day. That distinguished gentleman would, no doubt, have waited the
young prince's pleasure in his library had he known of his errand. But
since the Colonel had unfortunately taken himself off, there was
nothing, of course, for our Oliver to do but to remain where he was
until noon--this was Sue's way out of the difficulty--and then to catch
the Colonel at the bank where he could always be found between twelve
and one o'clock, or where Mr. Stiger, the cashier, could lay his hands
on him if he was anywhere in the neighborhood, a suggestion of Sue's
which at once relieved Oliver from further anxiety, Mr. Stiger being
one of his oldest and dearest friends.

By the time, however, that Oliver had reached the bank the Colonel had
left for the club, where he would have been too happy, no doubt--being
the most courteous of colonels, etc., etc.--"if his dear young friend
had only sent him word," etc.

All this our breathless young Mercury--Oliver never walked when he
could run--learned some hours later from old Mr. Stiger, the cashier,
who punched him in the ribs at the end of every sentence in which he
conveyed the disappointing information, calling him "Creeps," at short
intervals, and roaring with laughter at the boy's account of the causes
leading up to his missing the Colonel.

"Gone to the club, Creeps, don't I tell you (--punch in the ribs--);
gone to get a little sip of Madeira and a little bit of woodcock
(--punch over the heart--), and a little--oh, I tell you, you young
dog--" (this punch straight on the breast-bone)--"you ought to be a
bank director--you hear!--a big fat bank director, and own a big house
up in the Square, if you want to enjoy yourself--and have a pretty
daughter--Oh, you young rascal!" This last punch bent Oliver double,
and was followed by an outburst of uncontrollable laughter from Stiger.

These same punchings and outbursts had gone on since the days that
Oliver was in short trousers and Stiger was superintendent of the
Sunday-school which the boy had attended in his early years--Stiger was
still superintendent and of the same school: cashiers had to have
certificates of character in those days. A smooth-shaven, round-headed
old fellow was Stiger, with two little dabs of side-whiskers, a pair of
eyes that twinkled behind a pair of gold spectacles, and a bald head
kept polished by the constant mopping of a red silk handkerchief. His
costume in the bank was a black alpaca coat and high black satin stock,
which grabbed him tight around the neck, and held in place the two
points of his white collar struggling to be free. Across his waist-line
was a square of cloth. This, in summer, replaced his waistcoat, and, in
winter, protected it from being rubbed into holes by constant contact
with the edge of the counter.

His intimacy with Oliver dated from one hot Sunday morning years
before, when Oliver had broken in upon the old gentleman's long prayers
by sundry scrapings of his finger-nails down the whitewashed wall of
the school-room, producing a blood-cooling and most irreverent sound,
much to the discomfort of the worshippers.

"Who made that noise?" asked Mr. Stiger, when the amen was reached.

"Me, sir."

"What for?"

"To get cool. It makes creeps go down my back." From that day the old
cashier had never called Oliver anything but "Creeps."

Oliver, in a spirit of playful revenge, made caricatures of his
prosecutor in these later years, enlarging his nose, puffing out his
cheeks, and dressing him up in impossible clothes. These sketches he
would mail to the cashier as anonymous communications, always stopping
at the bank the next day to see how Stiger enjoyed them. He generally
found them tacked up over the cashier's desk. Some of them were still
there when Stiger died.

Carried away by the warm greetings of the old cashier, and the hearty,
whole-souled spirit of companionship inherent in the man--a spirit
always dear to Oliver--he not only stayed to make another caricature of
the old fellow, over which the original laughed until the tears ran
down his fat cheeks, but until all the old sketches were once more
taken from the drawer or examined on the wall and laughed at over
again, Stiger praising him for his cleverness and predicting all kinds
of honors and distinctions for him when his talents become recognized.
It was just the atmosphere of general approval in which our young hero
loved to bask, and again the hours slipped away and three o'clock came
and went and his mother's message was still undelivered. Nor had he
been at Judge Ellicott's office. This fact was not impressed upon him
by the moon-faced clock that hung over the cashier's desk--time made no
difference to Oliver--but by the cashier himself, who began stuffing
the big books into a great safe built into the wall, preparatory to
locking it with a key that could have opened the gate of a walled town,
and which the old gentleman took home with him every night and hung on
a nail by his bed.

Thus it came to pass that another half hour had struck before Oliver
mounted the steps of the Chesapeake Club in search of the elusive
Colonel.

The fat, mahogany-colored porter, who sat all day in the doorway of the
club, dozing in his lobster-shell bath-chair, answered his next
inquiry. This ancient relic; who always boasted that no gentleman
member of the club, dead or alive, could pass him without being
recognized, listened to Oliver's request with a certain lifeless air--a
manner always shown to strangers--and shuffled away to the reading-room
to find the Colonel.

The occupant of this bath-chair was not only one of the characters of
the club but one of the characters of the town. He was a squat,
broken-kneed old darky, with white eyebrows arching over big brass
spectacles, a flat nose, and two keen, restless monkey eyes. His hands,
like those of many negroes of his age, were long and shrivelled, the
palms wrinkled as the inside, of a turkey's foot and of the same color
and texture. His two feet, always in evidence, rested on their heels,
and were generally encased in carpet slippers--shoes being out of the
question owing to his life-long habit of storing inside his own person
the drainings of the decanters, an idiosyncrasy which produced a form
of gout that only carpet slippers could alleviate. In his earlier life
he had carried General Washington around in his arms, had waited on
Henry Clay, and had been body-servant to Lafayette, besides holding the
horses of half the generals of the War of 1812--at, least, he said so,
and no man of his color dared contradict him.

The years of service of this guardian of the front door dated back to
the time when the Chippendale furniture of Colonel Ralph Coston,
together with many of the portraits covering the walls, and the silver
chafing-dishes lining the sideboard, had come into the possession of
the club through that gentleman's last will and testament. Coston was
the most beloved of all the epicures of his time, and his famous
terrapin-stew--one of the marvellous, delicacies of the period--had
been cooked in these same chafing-dishes. The mahogany-colored Cerberus
had been Coston's slave as well as butler, and still belonged to the
estate. It was eminently proper, therefore, that he should still
maintain his position at the club as long as his feet held out.

While he was gone in search of the Colonel, Oliver occupied himself for
a moment in examining one of the old English sporting prints that
ornamented the side-walls of the bare, uncarpeted, dismal hall. It was
the second time that he had entered these sacred doors--few men of his
own age had ever done as much. He had stopped there once before in
search of his father, when his mother had been taken suddenly ill. He
recalled again the curious spiral staircase at the end of the hall
where his father had met him and which had impressed him so at the
time. He could see, too, the open closet out of which Mr. Horn had
taken his overcoat, and which was now half-filled with hats and coats.

From the desolate, uninviting hall, Oliver passed into the large
meeting-room of the club fronting the street, now filled with members,
many of whom had dropped in for half an hour on their way back to their
offices. Of these some of the older and more sedate men, like Judge
Bowman and Mr. Pancoast, were playing chess; others were seated about
the small tables, reading, sipping toddies, or chatting together. A few
of the younger bloods, men of forty or thereabouts, were standing by
the uncurtained windows watching the belles of the town in their
flounced dresses and wide leghorn hats, out for an afternoon visit or
promenade. Among these men Oliver recognized Howard Thom, son of the
Chief-Justice, poor as a church mouse and fifty years of age if a day.
Oliver was not surprised to find Thom craning his neck at the window.
He remembered the story they told of this perennial beau--of how he had
been in love with every woman in and around Kennedy Square, from Miss
Clendenning down to the latest debutante, and of how he would tell you
over his first toddy that he had sown his wild oats and was about to
settle down for life, and over his last--the sixth, or seventh, or
eighth--that the most adorable woman in town, after a life devoted to
her service, had thrown him over, and that henceforth all that was left
to him was a load of buckshot and six feet of earth.

Oliver bowed to those of the members he knew, and wheeling one of the
clumsy mahogany chairs into position, sat down to await the arrival of
Colonel Clayton.

Meanwhile his eyes wandered over the desolate room with its
leather-covered chairs and sofas and big marble mantel bare of every
ornament but another moon-faced clock--a duplicate of the one at the
bank--and two bronze candelabra flanking each end, and then on the
portraits of the dead and gone members which relieved the sombre
walls--one in a plum-colored coat with hair tied in a queue being no
other than his own ancestor. He wondered to himself where lay the charm
and power to attract in a place so colorless, and he thought, as was
his habit with all interiors, how different he would want it to be if
he ever became a member. His fresh young nature revolted at the
dinginess and bareness of the surroundings. He couldn't understand why
the men came here and what could be the fascination of sitting round
these cold tables talking by the hour when there was so much happiness
outside--so much of light and air and sunshine free to everybody.

He was, moreover, a little constrained and uncomfortable. There was
none of the welcome of Mr. Crocker's studio about this place, nor any
of the comforting companionship of the jolly old cashier, who made the
minutes fly as if they had wings; and that, too, in a musty bank far
more uninviting even than the club. He remembered his mother's message
now--and he remembered her face and the anxious expression--as we
always remember duties when we are uncomfortable. He meant to hurry
home to her as soon as the Colonel dismissed him, and tell her how it
had all happened, and how sorry he was, and what a stupid he had been,
and she would forgive him as she had a hundred times before.

As he sat absorbed in these thoughts his attention was attracted by a
conversation at the adjoining table between that dare-devil
cross-country rider, Tom Gunning of Calvert County, old General
McTavish of the Mexican War, and Billy Talbot the exquisite. Gunning
was in his corduroys and hunting-boots. He always wore them when he
came to town, even when dining with his friends. He had them on now,
the boots being specially in evidence, one being hooked over the chair
on which he sat and within a foot of Oliver's elbow. None of these
peculiarities, however, made the slightest difference in Kennedy
Square, so far as Gunning's social position was concerned--Tom's mother
having been a Carroll and his grandfather once Governor of the State.

The distinguished cross-country rider was telling General McTavish,
immaculate in black wig, blue coat, pepper-and-salt trousers and
patent-leather shoes, and red-faced Billy Talbot, of an adventure that
he, Gunning, had had the night before while driving home to his
plantation. The exquisite's costume was in marked contrast to those of
the other two--it was his second change that day. At this precise
moment he was upholstered in peg-top, checker-board trousers, bob-tail
Piccadilly coat, and a one-inch brim straw hat, all of the latest
English pattern. Everything, in fact, that Billy possessed was English,
from a rimless monocle decorating his left eye, down to the animated
door-mat of a skye-terrier that followed at his heels.

Oliver saw from the way in which McTavish leaned over the table,
protecting the tray with his two arms, that he was in command of the
decanter, and that the duty of alleviating the thirst of his companions
had devolved upon the General. Billy Talbot sat with his hat tipped
back on his head, his chin resting on his abbreviated cane, his eyes
fixed on Gunning. Both McTavish and Talbot were listening intently to
the cross-country rider's story.

"And you say you were sober, Gunning?" Oliver heard the General ask,
with a scrutinizing look at Tom. Not with any humorous intent--more
with the manner of a presiding officer at a court-martial, determined
to establish certain essential facts.

"As a clock, General. The first thing I knew the mare shied and I came
pretty near landin' in the dirt." (The lower county men always dropped
their g's.) "He was lyin', I tell you, right across the road. If it
hadn't been for Kitty, I would have run him down. I got out and held
onto the reins, and there he was, sir, stretched out as drunk as a
lord, flat on his back and sound asleep. I saw right away that he was a
gentleman, and I tied the mare to a tree, picked him up with the
greatest care, laid him on the side of the road, put his hat under his
head, and made him as comfortable as I could, when, by George, sir! I
hadn't any more than got back to my buggy, when bang! went a ball
within a foot of my head!"

The General, who, as he listened, had been repointing the waxed ends of
his dyed mustache with his lemon-colored kid gloves, now leaned back in
his chair.

"Fired at you, sir?" The General had served both at Chapultepec and
Buena Vista, and was an authority where gunpowder was concerned.

"That's just what he did. Came near takin' the top of my head off!
Hadn't been so dark he would have done it."

"Good God! you don't tell me so!" exclaimed the General, mopping his
lips with his perfumed handkerchief. "Were you armed, Gunning?"

"No, sir, I was entirely at his mercy and absolutely defenceless. Well,
I grabbed the reins to quiet the mare and then I hollered out--'What
the devil do you mean, sir, by tryin' to blow the top of my head off?'
I could see now that he had raised himself up on his elbow and was
lookin' at me in a way I did not like.

"'What do you mean by disturbin' my rest, sir,' he called back.

"'Well, but my dear sir, you were lyin' in the middle of the road and
might have been run over.'

"'It's none of your business where I lie,' he hollered back. 'I go to
sleep where I damn please, sir. I consider it a very great liberty.'

"'I, beg your pardon, sir,' I said. 'I did not intend any trespass--' I
was walkin' toward him now. I did not want him to shoot again.

"'That's sufficient, sir,' he said. 'No gentleman can do more. There's
my hand, sir. Allow me, sir, to offer you a drink. If you will roll me
over, you will find my flask in my coat-tail pocket.'

"Well, I rolled him over, took a drink, and then I brought the mare
alongside, helped him in and drove him home to my house. He was a most
delightful gentleman. Didn't leave my place until four o'clock in the
mornin'. He lives about fifteen miles below me. He told me his name was
Toffington. Do you happen to know him, Talbot?" said Gunning, turning
to Billy.

"Toffington, Toffington," said Billy, dropping his eye-glasses with a
movement of his eyebrows. He had listened to the story without the
slightest comment. "No, Tom, unless he is one of those upper county
men. There was a fellow I met in London last year--" (Billy pronounced
it "larst yarh," to Oliver's infinite amusement) "with some such name
as that. He and I went over to Kew Gardens with the Duke of--."

Gunning instantly turned around with an impatient gesture--nobody ever
listened to one of Billy's London stories, they being the never-ending
jokes around Kennedy Square--faced the General again, much to Oliver's
regret, who would have loved above all things to hear Billy descant on
his English experiences.

"Do you, General, know anybody named Toffington?" asked Tom.

"No, Gunning--but here comes Clayton, he knows everybody in the State
that is worth knowing. What you have told me is most
extraordinary--most extraordinary, Gunning. It only goes to show how
necessary it is for every man to be prepared for emergencies of this
kind. You should never go unarmed, sir. You had a very narrow escape--a
very narrow escape, Gunning. Here, Clayton--come over here."

Oliver pulled his face into long lines. The picture of Gunning taking a
drink with a man who a moment before had tried to blow the top of his
head off, and the serious way in which the coterie about the table
regarded the incident, so excited the boy's risibles that he would have
laughed outright had not his eye rested on the Colonel walking toward
him.

The Colonel, evidently, did not hear McTavish's call. His mind was
occupied with something much more important. He had been finishing a
game of whist upstairs, and the mahogany-colored Cerberus had not dared
to disturb him until the hand was played out. The fact that young
Oliver Horn had called to see him at such an hour and in such a place
had greatly disturbed him. He felt sure that something out of the
ordinary had happened.

"My dear boy," he cried, as Oliver rose to meet him, "I have this
instant heard you were here, or I never should have kept you waiting a
moment. Nothing serious--nothing at home?"

"Oh, no, Colonel. Only a word from mother, sir. I missed you at the
bank and Mr. Stiger thought that I might better come here," and he
delivered his mother's message in a low voice and resumed his seat
again.

The Colonel, now that his mind was at rest, dropped into a chair,
stroked his goatee with his thumb and forefinger, and ran over in his
mind the sum of his engagements.

"Tell your dear mother," he said, "that I will do myself the honor of
calling upon her on my way home late this afternoon. Nothing will give
me greater pleasure. Now stay awhile with me and let me order something
for you, my boy," and he beckoned to one of the brown-coated servants
who had entered the room with a fresh tray for the Gunning table.

"No, thank you, Colonel; I ought not to stop," Oliver replied, in an
apologetic way, as he rose from his seat. "I really ought to go back
and tell mother," and with a grasp of Clayton's hand and a bow to one
or two men in the room who were watching his movements--the Colonel
following him to the outer door--Oliver took himself off, as was the
duty of one so young and so entirely out of place among a collection of
men all so knowing and distinguished.




CHAPTER VI

AMOS COBB'S ADVICE


In full justice to the Chesapeake Club the scribe must admit that such
light-weights as Billy Talbot, Torn Gunning, and Carter Thorn did not
fairly represent the standing of the organization. Many of the most
cultivated and enlightened men about Kennedy Square and the neighboring
country enjoyed its privileges; among them not only such men as Richard
Horn, Nathan Gill, the Chief-Justice of the State, and those members of
the State Legislature whose birth was above reproach, but most of the
sporting gentry of the county, as well as many of the more wealthy
planters who lived on the Bay and whose houses were opened to their
fellow-members when the ducks were flying.

Each man's lineage, occupation, and opinions on the leading topics of
the time were as well known to the club as to the man himself. Any
new-corner presenting himself for membership was always subjected to
the severest scrutiny, and had to be favorably passed upon by a large
majority of the committee before a sufficient number of votes could be
secured for his election.

The only outsider elected for years had been Amos Cobb, of Vermont, the
abolitionist, as he was generally called, who invariably wore black
broad-cloth and whose clean-shaven face--a marked contrast to the
others--with its restless black eyes, strong nose, and firm mouth, was
as sharp and hard as the rocks of his native State. His election to
full membership of the Chesapeake Club was not due to his wealth and
commercial standing--neither of these would have availed him--but to
the fact that he had married a daughter of Judge Wharton of Wharton
Hall, and had thus, by reason of his alliance with one of the first
families of the State, been admitted to all the social privileges of
Kennedy Square. This exception in his favor, however, had never
crippled Cobb's independence nor stifled his fearlessness in expressing
his views on any one of the leading topics of the day. The Vermonter
had worked with his hands when a boy on his father's farm, and believed
in the dignity of labor and the blessings of self-support. He believed,
too, in the freedom of all men, black and white, and looked upon
slavery as a crime. He expressed these sentiments openly and
unreservedly, and declared that no matter how long he might live South
he would never cease to raise his voice against a system which allowed
a man--as he put it--"to sit down in the shade and fan himself to sleep
while a lot of niggers whose bodies he owned were sweating in a
corn-field to help feed and clothe him."

These sentiments, it must be said, did not add to his popularity,
although the time had not yet arrived when he would have been thrown
into the street for uttering them.

Nathan Gill was a daily visitor. He was just mounting the club steps,
his long pen-wiper cloak about his shoulders, as Oliver, after his
interview with Colonel Clayton, passed down the street on his way back
to his mother. Nathan shook hands with the Colonel, and the two entered
the main room, and seated themselves at one of the tables.

Billy Talbot, who had moved to the window, and who had been watching
Oliver until he disappeared around the corner, dropped his eye-glass
with that peculiar twitch of the upper lip which no one could have
imitated, and crossed the room to where Nathan and Colonel Clayton had
taken their seats. Waggles, the scrap of a Skye terrier, who was never
three feet from Billy's heels, instantly crossed with him. After Billy
had anchored himself and had assumed his customary position, with his
feet slightly apart, Waggles, as was his habit, slid in and sat down on
his haunches between his master's gaiters. There he lifted his fluffy
head and gazed about him. The skill with which Mr. Talbot managed his
dog was only equalled by the dexterity with which he managed his
eye-glass; he never inadvertently stepped on the one nor unconsciously
let slip the other. This caused Mr. Talbot considerable mental strain,
but as it was all to which he ever subjected himself he stood the test
bravely.

"Who is that young man, Colonel" Billy began, as he bent his head to be
sure that Waggles was in position. He had been abroad while Oliver was
growing up, and so did not recognize him.

"That's Richard Horn's son," the Colonel said, without raising his eyes
from the paper. The Colonel never took Billy seriously.

"And a fine young fellow he is," broke in Nathan, straightening himself
proudly.

"Hope he don't take after his father, Gill. By the way, what's that old
wisionary doing now?" drawled Billy, throwing back the lapels of his
coat, and slapping his checked trousers with his cane. "Larst time you
talked to me about him he had some machine with w'eels and horse-shoe
magnets, didn't he? He hasn't been in here for some time, so I know
he's at work on some tomfoolery or other. Amazing, isn't it, that a man
of his blood, with a cellar of the best Madeiwa in the State, should
waste his time on such things. Egad! I cawn't understand it." Some of
Billy's expressions, as well as his accent, came in with his clothes.
"Now, if I had that Madeiwa, do you know what I'd do with it? I'd--"

"Perfectly, Billy," cried a man at the next table, who was bending over
a game of chess. "You'd drink it up in a week." Talbot had never been
known by any other name than Billy, and never would be as long as he
lived.

When the laugh had subsided, Nathan, whose cheeks were still burning at
the slighting way in which Billy Talbot had spoken of Richard, and who
had sat hunched up in his chair combing the white hair farther over his
ears with his long, spare fingers, a habit with him when he was in deep
thought, lifted his head and remarked, quietly, addressing the room
rather than Talbot:

"Richard's mind is not on his cellar; he's got something to think of
besides Madeira and cards and dogs." And he looked toward Waggles. "You
will all, one day, be proud to say that he lived in our town. Richard
is a genius, one of the most remarkable men of the day, and everybody
outside of this place knows it; you will be compelled to admit it yet.
I left him only half an hour ago, and he is just perfecting a motor,
gentlemen, which will--"

"Does it go yet, Nathan?" interrupted Cobb, who was filling a glass
from a decanter which a brown-coated darky had brought him. Cobb's wife
was Nathan's cousin, and, therefore, he had a right to be familiar. "I
went to see his machine the other day, but I couldn't make anything out
of it. Horn is a little touched here, isn't he?" and he tapped his
forehead and smiled knowingly.

"No, Amos, the motor was not running when I left the shop," answered
Nathan, dryly and with some dignity, "but it will be, he assured me,
perhaps by to-morrow." He could fight Billy Talbot, but he never
crossed swords with Cobb, never in late years. Cobb was the one man in
all the world, he once told Richard, with whom he had nothing in common.

"Oh, to-morrow?" And Cobb whistled as he put down the decanter and
picked up the day's paper. It was one of Cobb's jokes--this "to-morrow"
of his neighbors. "What was a Northern man's to-day was always a
Southern man's to-morrow," he would say. "I hope this young man of whom
you speak so highly is not walking in the footsteps of this genius of a
father? He looks to me like a young fellow that had some stuff in him
if anybody would bring it out."

The half-concealed sneer in Cobb's voice grated also on old Judge
Bowman, who threw down his book and looked up over his bowed
spectacles. He was a testy old fellow, with a Burgundy face and shaggy
white hair, a chin and nose that met together like a parrot's, and an
eye like a hawk. It was one of his principles to permit none of his
intimates to speak ill of his friends in his hearing. Criticisms,
therefore, by an outsider like Cobb were especially obnoxious to him.

"Richard Horn's head is all right, Mr. Cobb, and so is his heart," he
exclaimed in an indignant tone. "As for his genius, sir--Gill is within
the mark. He IS one of the remarkable men of our day. You are quite
right, too, about his young son, who has just left here. He has all the
qualities that go to make a gentleman, and many of those which will
make a jurist. He is now studying law with my associate, Judge
Ellicott--a profession ennobled by his ancestors, sir, and one, for
which what you call his 'stuff,' but which we, sir, call his 'blood,'
especially fits him. You Northern men, I know, don't believe in blood.
We do down here. This young man comes of a line of ancestors that have
reflected great credit on our State for more than a hundred years, and
he is bound to make his mark. His grandfather on his mother's side was
our Chief Justice in 1810, and his great-grandfather was--"

"That's just what's the matter with most of you Southerners, Judge,"
interrupted Cobb, his black eyes snapping. "You think more of blood
than you do of brains. We rate a man on Northern soil by what he does
himself, not what a bundle of bones in some family burying-ground did
for him before he was born. Don't you agree with me, Clayton?"

"I can't say I do, Cobb," replied the Colonel, slowly, stirring his
toddy. "I never set foot on your soil but once, and so am unfamiliar
with your ways." He never liked Cobb. "He's so cursedly practical, and
so proud of it, too," he would often say; "and if you will pardon me,
sir--a trifle underbred."

"When was that?" asked Cobb, looking over the top of his paper.

"That was some years ago, when I chased a wounded canvas-back across
the Susquehanna River, and had to go ashore to get him; and I want to
tell you, sir, that what you call 'your soil' was damned disagreeable
muck. I had to change my boots when I got back to my home, and I've
never worn them since." And the Colonel crushed the sugar in his glass
with his spoon as savagely as if each lump were the head of an enemy,
and raised the mixture to his mouth.

Amos's thin lips curled. The high and lofty airs of these patricians
always exasperated him. The shout of laughter that followed the
Colonel's reply brought the color to his cheeks.

"Chased him like a runaway nigger, I suppose, Clayton, didn't you? and
wrung his neck when you got him--" retorted Amos, biting his lips.

"Of course, like I would any other piece of my property that tried to
get away, or as I would wring the neck of any man who would help him--"
And the Colonel looked meaningly at the Vermonter and drained his glass
with a gulp. Then smothering his anger, he moved away to the window,
where he watched Mr. Talbot, who had just left the club and who at the
moment was standing on the corner making his daily afternoon inspection
of the two connecting streets; an occupation which Billy varied by
saluting each new-corner with a slap of his cane on his checker-board
trousers and a stentorian "Bah Jove!" Waggles meanwhile squatting
pensively between his gaiters.

When an hour later the Colonel presented himself at the Horn mansion,
no trace of this encounter with Cobb was in his face nor in his manner.
Men did not air their grievances in their own nor anyone's else home
around Kennedy Square.

Mrs. Horn met him with her hand extended. She had been watching for
Oliver's return with a degree of impatience rarely seen in her. She had
hoped that the Colonel would have called upon her before he went to his
office, and could not understand his delay until Oliver had given his
account of the morning mishaps. She was too anxious now to chide him.
It was but another indication of his temperament, she thought--a fault
to be corrected with the others that threatened his success in life.

Holding fast to the Colonel's hand she drew him to one of the old
haircloth sofas and told him the whole story.

"Do not give the mortgage a thought, my dear Sallie," the Colonel said,
In his kindest manner, when she had finished speaking, laying his hand
on her wrist. "My only regret is that it should have caused you a
moment's uneasiness. I know that our bank has lately been in need of a
large sum of money, and this loan, no doubt, was called in by the
board. But it will be all right--if not I will provide for it myself."

"No--I do not want that, and Richard, if he knew, would not be willing
either. Tell me, please, how this money is loaned," and she turned and
looked earnestly into his face. "What papers are passed, and who signs
them? I have never had anything to do with such matters, and you must
explain it all clearly."

"A note signed by Richard and made payable on a certain date was given
to the bank, and the mortgage was deposited as security."

"And if the note is not paid?"

"Then the property covered by the mortgage is sold, and the bank
deducts its loan--any balance, of course, is paid over to Richard."

"And when the sale is put off--what is done then?"

"A new note is given," and here the Colonel stopped as if in doubt,
"and sometimes a second name is placed on the note increasing the
security. But, Sallie, dear, do not let this part of it ever again
cross your mind. I will attend to it should it become necessary. It is
not often," and the Colonel waved his hand gallantly, "that a Clayton
can do a Horn a service."

"Thank you, dear friend, and it is just like you to wish to do it, but
this I cannot agree to. I have thought of another way since you have
been talking to me. Would it--" and she stopped and looked down on the
floor, "would it be of any use if I signed a note myself? This house we
live in is my own, as you know, and would be an additional security to
the bank if anything should happen."

The offer was so unusual that the Colonel caught his breath. He looked
at her in astonishment, but her eyes never wavered. He felt instantly
that, however lightly he might view the subject, the matter was
intensely serious with her. The Colonel half rose to his feet, and with
a bow that in Kennedy Square had earned for him the title of "the
Chesterfield of his time, sir," placed his hand on his heart.

"My dear Sallie," he said, "not a member of the board could refuse. It
would at once remove any obstacle the directors might have."

"Thank you, then we will leave it so, and I will have the papers
prepared at once."

"And is this Richard's advice?" the Colonel ventured to ask, slowly
regaining his seat. There were some misgivings still lingering in his
Chesterfieldian mind as to whether the proudest man he knew, gentle as
he was, would not forbid the whole transaction.

"No. He does not know of my purpose, and you will please not tell him.
He only knows that I am opposed to allowing the property to be sold,
and he has promised me that he will take no steps in the matter without
my consent. All I want you to do now is to tell him that the bank has
decided to let the matter stand. This obligation hereafter will be
between me and the board, and I will pledge myself to carry it out. And
now, one thing more before you go, and I ask this because you have seen
him grow up and I know you love him. What shall I do with Oliver?"

The Colonel again caught his breath. Gallant gentleman of the old
school, as he was, with a profound respect for the other sex, the
question startled him. According to his experience and traditions, the
fathers generally looked after the welfare of the sons and found them
places in life--not the mothers.

"What do you want to do with him?" he asked, quietly.

"I want him to go to work. I am afraid this life here will ruin him."

"Why, I thought he was studying law with Ellicott." The announcement
could not have been very surprising to the Colonel. He doubtless knew
how much time Oliver spent at Judge Ellicott's office.

"He no doubt THINKS he's studying, dear friend, but he really spends
half his time in old Mr. Crocker's studio, who puts the worst possible
notions into his head, and the balance of his time he is with your
Sue," and she smiled faintly.

"For which you can hardly blame him, dear lady," and the Colonel bent
his head graciously.

"No, for she is as sweet as she can be, and you know I love her dearly,
but they are both children, and will be for some years. You don't want
to support them, do you? and you know Richard can't," and there flashed
out from her eyes one of those quizzical glances which the Colonel
remembered so well in her girlhood.

The Colonel nodded his head, but he did not commit himself. He had
never for a moment imagined that Oliver's love-affair would go as far
as that, and, then again, he knew Sue.

"What do you suggest doing with him? I will help, of course, in any way
I can," he said, after a pause, during which Mrs. Horn sat watching
every expression that crossed his face.

"I don't know. I have not fully made up my mind. I have been greatly
disturbed over Oliver. He seems to be passing through one of those
dangerous crises which often come to a boy. What do you think of my
sending him to New York?"

"THE NORTH, Sallie! Why, you wouldn't send Oliver up North, would you?"

The announcement this time gave the Colonel so genuine a shock that it
sent the blood tingling to his cheeks. Really, the idiosyncrasies of
the Horn family were beyond his comprehension! Evidently Richard's
vagaries had permeated his household.

"I do not like the influence of the North on our young men, my dear
Madam." The Colonel spoke now with great seriousness and with some
formality, and without any of the Chesterfieldian accompaniments of
tone or gesture. "If he were my boy, I should keep him here. He is
young and light-hearted, I know, and loves pleasure, but that will all
come out of him. Let him stay with Ellicott; he will bring him out all
right. There is a brusqueness and a want of refinement among most
Northern men that have always grated on me. You can see it any day in
Amos Cobb."

As he spoke a slight flush overspread his listener's face. The
positiveness of his tone, she thought, carried with it a certain
uncomplimentary criticism of her suggestion. The Colonel saw it, and,
as if in apology and to prove his case, added, in a gentler tone: "Only
this afternoon at the club I heard Cobb speaking in the most outrageous
manner about our most treasured institutions. It is not his fault
perhaps. It is the fault of his breeding, but it is unbearable all the
same. Keep Oliver here. He has a most engaging and lovable nature, is
as clean and sweet as a girl, and I haven't a doubt but what he will
honor both you and his blood. Take my word for it, and keep him at
home. He is young yet, barely twenty-two--there is plenty of time for
him." And the Colonel rose from the sofa, lifted Mrs. Horn's fingers to
his lips and bowed himself out.

The Colonel only told the truth, as he saw it. In his day and
generation men of twenty-two were but boys, and only gray-beards ruled
the State and counting-house. The Senators were indeed grave and
reverend seigniors, and the merchants, in their old-fashioned
dress-coats, looked more like distinguished diplomats than buyers and
sellers of produce. In those days, too, the young man with a mustache
was thought presuming and dangerous, and the bank who would have
selected a cashier under forty would have caused a run on its funds in
a week after the youth had been appointed to his position.

After the Colonel's departure Mrs. Horn sat in deep thought. The
critical tones of his voice still lingered in her memory. But her
judgment had not been shaken nor was her mind satisfied. Oliver still
troubled her. The Colonel's advice might be right, but she dared not
rely upon it.

The next day she sent for Amos Cobb: Malachi took the message this
time, not Oliver. Cobb came on the minute. He was greatly surprised at
Mrs. Horn's note, for although his wife was an intimate friend of Mrs.
Horn's, and he himself would have been welcome, he was seldom present
at any of the functions of the house and could not be considered one of
its intimate guests. He did not like music, he said to his wife, when
urged to go, and, as he did not play chess or drink Madeira, he
preferred to stay at home.

Malachi relieved Amos of his hat, and conducted him into Mrs. Horn's
presence with rather a formal bow--quite different from the low salaam
with which he had greeted Colonel Clayton. "Dat bobobalish'-nest,
Mister Cobb, jes' gone in de parlor," he said to Aunt Hannah when he
regained the kitchen. "Looks like he lived on parsimmons, he dat sour."

Mrs. Horn received her visitor cordially, but with a reserve which she
had not maintained toward the Colonel, for Cobb had never represented
to her anything but a money standard pure and simple. It was only when
the Colonel had mentioned his name, and then only because of her urgent
need of just such sound practical advice as she knew he could give that
she had determined to seek his services--quite as she would have
consulted an architect or an attorney.

The Vermonter took his seat on the extreme edge of the sofa, squared
his shoulders, pulled up the points of his high collar, touched
together the tips of all his fingers, and looked straight at his
hostess.

"I am greatly obliged to you for coming," she began, "for I know how
busy you are, but I have a question to ask of you which I feel sure you
can answer better than anyone I know. It is about my son Oliver. I am
going to be perfectly frank with you, and I want you to be equally
frank with me." And she summed up Oliver's aims, temptations, and
failings with a skill that gained the Vermonter's closest attention.
"With all this," she continued, "he is affectionate, loves me dearly,
and has never disobeyed me in his life. It is his love of change that
worries me--his instability--one thing one moment, and another the
next. It seems to me the only way to break this up is to throw him
completely on his own resources so that he may realize for once what
life really means. Now tell me--" and she looked searchingly into
Cobb's face, as if eager to note the effect of her question--"if he
were your only son, would you, in view of all I have told you, send him
to New York to make his start in life, or would you keep him here?"

The Vermonter's face had begun to lighten as she progressed, and had
entirely cleared when he learned why he had been sent for. He had been
afraid, when he received her note, that it had been about the mortgage.
Cobb was chairman of the Loan Committee at the bank, had personally
called attention to Richard's note being overdue, and had himself
ordered its payment.

"My two boys are at school in Vermont, Madam," he answered, slowly.

"But Oliver must earn his own living," she said, earnestly. "His father
will have nothing to give him."

Cobb made no reply. He was not surprised. Most all of these
aristocratic Southerners were on their last legs. He was right about
the note, he said to himself--it was just as well to have it paid--and
he made a mental memorandum to inquire about it as soon as he reached
his office, and have it pressed for settlement at once. Business
matters must be kept intact.

"What do you want him to do, Madam?" he asked, looking at her keenly
from under his bushy eyebrows.

"Anything to earn his bread," she replied, in a decided tone.

Cobb passed his hand over his face, pinched his chin with his thumb and
forefinger, and looked out of the window. The answer pleased him. It
pleased him, too, to be consulted by the Horns on a matter of this
kind. It pleased him most of all to realize that when these aristocrats
who differed with him politically got into a financial hole they had to
send for him to help pull them out.

For a moment the Vermonter remained in deep thought. "Here is a
Southern woman," he said to himself, "with some common-sense and with a
head on her shoulders. If her husband had half her brains I'd let the
mortgage stand." Then he turned and faced her squarely, his eyes boring
into hers.

"Send him to New York, by all means, Madam, or anywhere else out of
here," he said, firmly, but with a kindly tone in his voice. "When you
decide, let me know--I will give him a letter to a business friend of
mine who lives on the Hudson, a short distance above the city, who may
help him. But let me advise you to send him at once. I saw your son
yesterday at the club, and he exactly fits your measure, except in one
respect. He's got more grit in him than you give him credit for. I
looked him over pretty carefully, and if he gets in a tight place you
needn't worry about him. He'll pull out, or my name isn't Cobb. And now
one thing more--" and he rose stiffly from the sofa and buttoned up his
coat--"don't give him any pocket-money. Chuck him out neck and heels
into the world and let him shift for himself. That's the way I was
treated, and that's the way I got on. Good-day."




CHAPTER VII

A SEAT IN UNION SQUARE


Within a day's journey of Kennedy Square lay another wide
breathing-space, its winding paths worn smooth by countless hurrying
feet.

Over its flat monotony straggled a line of gnarled willows, marking the
wanderings of some guileless brook long since swallowed up and lost in
the mazes of the great city like many another young life fresh from
green fields and sunny hill-sides. This desert of weeds and sun-dried,
yellow grass, this kraal for scraggly trees and broken benches,
breasted the rush of the great city as a stone breasts a stream,
dividing its current--one part swirling around and up Broadway to the
hills and the other flowing eastward toward Harlem and the Sound.
Around its four sides, fronting the four streets that hemmed it in, ran
a massive iron railing, socketed in stone and made man-proof and
dog-proof by four great iron gates. These gates were opened at dawn to
let the restless in, and closed at night to keep the weary out.

Above these barriers of stone and iron no joyous magnolias lifted their
creamy blossoms; no shy climbing roses played hide-and-seek, blushing
scarlet when caught. Along its foot-worn paths no drowsy Moses ceased
his droning call; no lovers walked forgetful of the world; no staid old
gentlemen wandered idly, their noses in their books.

All day long on its rude straight-backed benches and over its
thread-bare turf sprawled unkempt women with sick babies from the
shanties; squalid, noisy children from the rookeries; beggars in rags,
and now and then some hopeless wayfarer--who for the moment had given
up his search for work or bread and who rested or slept until the tap
of a constable's club brought him to consciousness and his feet.

At night, before the gates were closed--ten o'clock was the hour--there
could always be found, under its dim lamps, some tired girl, sitting in
the light for better protection while she rested, or some weary laborer
on the way home from his long day's work, and always passing to and
fro, swinging his staff, bullying the street-rats who were playing tag
among the trees, and inspiring a wholesome awe among those hiding in
the shadows, lounged some guardian of the peace awaiting the hour when
he could drive the inmates to the sidewalk and shut the gates behind
them with a bang.

Here on one of these same straight-backed wooden seats one September
night--a night when the air was heavy with a blurred haze, through
which the lamps peered as in a fog, and the dust lay thick upon the
leaves--sat our Oliver.

Outside the square--all about the iron fence, and surging past the big
equestrian statue, could be heard the roar and din of the great
city--that maelstrom which now seemed ready to engulf him. No sound of
merry laughter reached him, only rumbling of countless wheels, the slow
thud of never-ending, crowded stages lumbering over the cobbles, the
cries of the hucksters selling hot corn, and the ceaseless scrapings of
a thousand feet.

He had sat here since the sun had gone down watching the crowds,
wondering how they lived and how they had earned their freedom from
such cares as were now oppressing him. His heart was heavy. A
long-coveted berth, meaning self-support and independence and
consequent relief to his mother's heart, had been almost within his
grasp. It was not the place he had expected when he left home. It was
much more menial and unremunerative. But he had outlived all his bright
hopes. He was ready now to take anything he could get to save him from
returning to Kennedy Square, or what would be still worse--from asking
his mother for a penny more than she had given him. Rather than do this
he would sweep the streets.

As he leaned forward on the bench, his face in his hands, his elbows on
his knees, his thoughts went back to his father's house. He knew what
they were all doing at this hour; he could see the porches crowded with
the boys and girls he loved, their bright voices filling the night-air,
Sue in the midst of them, her curls about her face. He could see his
father in the big chair reading by the lamp, that dear old father who
had held his hands so tenderly and spoken with such earnestness the day
before he had left Kennedy Square.

"Your mother is right," Richard had said. "I am glad you are going, my
son; the men at the North are broader-minded than we are here, and you
will soon find your place among them. Great things are ahead of us, my
boy. I shall not live to see them, but you will."

He could see his mother, too, sitting by the window, looking out upon
the trees. He knew where her thoughts lay. As his mind rested on her
pale face his eyes filled with tears. "Dear old mother," he said to
himself--"I am not forgetting, dear. I am holding on. But oh, if I had
only got the place to-day, how happy you would be to-morrow."

A bitter feeling had risen in his heart, when he had opened the letter
which had brought him the news of the loss of this hoped-for situation.
"This is making one's way in the world, is it?" he had said to himself
with a heavy sigh. Then the calm eyes of his mother had looked into his
again, and he had felt the pressure of the soft hand and heard the
tones of her voice:

"You may have many discouragements, my son, and will often be ready to
faint by the way, but stick to it and you will win."

His bitterness had been but momentary, and he had soon pulled himself
together, but his every resource seemed exhausted now. He had counted
so on the situation--that of a shipping-clerk in a dry-goods
store--promised him because of a letter that he carried from Amos
Cobb's friend. But at the last moment the former clerk, who had been
laid off because of sickness, had been taken back, and so the weary
search for work must begin again.

And yet with everything against him Oliver had no thought of giving up
the struggle. Even Amos Cobb would have been proud of him could he have
seen the dogged tenacity with which he clung to his purpose--a tenacity
due to his buoyant, happy temperament, or to his devotion to his
mother's wishes; or (and this is more than probable) to some drops of
blood, perhaps, that had reached his own through his mother's
veins--the blood of that Major with the blue and buff coat, whose
portrait hung in the dining-room at home, and who in the early days had
braved the flood at Trenton side by side with the Hero of the Bronze
Horse now overlooking the bench on which Oliver sat; or it may be of
that other ancestor in the queue whose portrait hung over the mantel of
the club and who had served his State with distinction in his day.

Whatever the causes of these several effects, the one dominating power
which now controlled him was his veneration for his mother's name and
honor. For on the night succeeding Amos Cobb's visit after she had
dropped upon her knees and poured out her heart in prayer she had gone
into Oliver's bedroom, and shutting the door had told him of the
mortgage; of his father's embarrassment, and the danger they suffered
of losing the farm--their only hope for their old age--unless success
crowned Richard's inventions. With his hand fast in hers she had given
him in exact detail all that she had done to ward off this calamity;
recounting, word by word, what she had said to the Colonel, lowering
her voice almost to a whisper as she spoke of the solemn promise she
had made him--involving her own and her husband's honor--and the
lengths to which she was prepared to go to keep her obligations to the
bank.

Then, her hand still clasping his, the two sitting side by side on his
bed, his wondering, startled eyes looking into hers--for this world of
anxiety was an unknown world to him--she had by slow stages made him
realize how necessary it was that he, their only son, and their sole
dependence, should begin at once to earn his daily bread; not only on
his own account but on hers and his father's. In her tenderness she had
not told him that the real reason was his instability of purpose;
fearing to wound his pride, she had put it solely on the ground of his
settling down to some work.

"It is the law of nature, my son," she had added. "Everything that
lives must WORK to live. You have only to watch the birds out here in
the Square to convince you of that. Notice them to-morrow, when you go
out. See how busy they are; see how long it takes for any one of them
to get a meal. You are old enough now to begin to earn your own bread,
and you must begin at once, Ollie. Your father can no longer help you.
I had hoped your profession would do this for you, but that is not to
be thought of now."

Oliver, at first, had been stunned by it all. He had never before given
the practical side of life a single thought. Everything had gone along
smoothly from his earliest remembrance. His father's house had been his
home and his protection; his room with its little bed and pretty
hangings and all its comforts--a room cared for like a girl's--had
always been open to him. He had never once asked himself how these
things came about, nor why they continued. These revelations of his
mother's therefore were like the sudden opening of a door covering a
vault over which he had walked unconsciously and which now, for the
first time, he saw yawning beneath him.

"Poor daddy," were his first words. "I never knew a thing about his
troubles; he seems always so happy and so gentle. I am so sorry--dear
daddy--dear dad--" he kept repeating.

And then as she spoke there flashed into his mind the thought of his
own hopes. They were shattered now. He knew that the art career was
dead for him, and that all his dreams in that direction were over.

He was about to tell her this, but he stopped before the words were
formed. He would not add his own burden to her sorrow. No, he would
bear it alone. He would tell Sue, but he would not tell his mother.
Next there welled up in his heart a desire to help this mother whom he
idolized, and this father who represented to him all that was kind and
true.

"What can I do? Where can I go, dearie?" he cried with sudden resolve.
"Even if I am to work with my hands I am ready to do it, but it must be
away from here. I could not do it here at home with everybody looking
on; no, not here! not here!"

This victory gained, the mother with infinite tact, little by little,
unfolded to the son the things she had planned. Finally with her arms
about his neck, smoothing his cheek with her hands she told him of Amos
Cobb's advice and of his offer, adding: "He will give you a letter to
his friend who lives at Haverstraw near New York, my boy, with whom you
can stay until you get the situation you want."

The very impracticability of this scheme did not weigh with her. She
did not see how almost hopeless would be the task of finding employment
in an unknown city. Nor did the length of time her son might be a
burden on a total stranger make any difference in her plans. Her own
home had always been open to the friends of her friends, and for any
length of time, and her inborn sense of hospitality made it impossible
for her to understand any other conditions. Then again she said to
herself: "Mr. Cobb is a thoroughly practical man, and a very kind one.
His friend will welcome Oliver, or he would not have allowed my son to
go." She had repeated, however, no word of the Vermonter's advice "to
chuck the boy out neck and heels into the world and let him shift for
himself," although the very Spartan quality of the suggestion, in spite
of its brusqueness, had greatly pleased her. She could not but
recognize that Amos understood. She would have faced the situation
herself if she had been in her son's place; she said so to herself. And
she hoped, too, that Oliver would face it as bravely when the time came.

As for the temptations that might assail her boy in the great city, she
never gave them a thought. Neither the love of drink nor the love of
play ran in her own or Richard's veins--not for generations back. "One
test of a gentleman, my son," Richard always said, "lies in the way in
which he controls his appetites--in the way he regards his meat and
drink. Both are foods for the mind as well as for the body, and must be
used as such. Gluttons and drunkards should be classed together." No,
her boy's heart might lead him astray, but not his appetites, and never
his passions. She was as sure of that as she was of his love.

As she talked on, Oliver's mind, yielding to her stronger will as clay
does to a sculptor's hand, began to take shape. What at first had
looked like a hardship now began to have an attractive side. Perhaps
the art career need not be wholly given up. Perhaps, too, there was a
better field for him in New York than here--old Mr. Crocker had always
told him this. Then, too, there was something of fascination after all,
in going out alone like a knight-errant to conquer the world. And in
that great Northern city, too, with its rush and whirl and all that it
held for him of mystery! How many times had Mr. Crocker talked to him
by the hour of its delights. And Ellicott's chair! Yes, he could get
rid of that. And Sue? Sue would wait--she had promised him she would;
no, there was no doubt about Sue! She would love him all the better if
he fought his battle alone. Only the day before she had told him of the
wonderful feats of the White Knight, that the new English poet had just
written about and that everybody in Kennedy Square was now reading.

Above all there was the delight of another sensation--the sensation of
a new move. This really pleased him best. He was apparently listening
to his mother when these thoughts took possession of him, for his eyes
were still fixed on hers, but he heard only a word now and then. It was
his imagination that swayed him now, not his will nor his judgment. He
would have his own adventures in the great city and see the world as
Mr. Crocker had done, he said to himself.

"Yes, dearie, I'll go," he answered quickly. "Don't talk any more about
it. I'll do just as you want me to, and I'll go anywhere you say. But
about the money for my expenses? Can father give it to me?" he asked
suddenly, a shade of anxiety crossing his face.

"We won't ask your father, Ollie," she said, drawing him closer to her.
She knew he would yield to her wishes, and she loved him the better for
it, if that were possible. "I have a little money saved which I will
give you. You won't be long finding a good place."

"And how often can I come back to you?" he cried, starting up. Until
now this phase of the situation had not entered his mind.

"Not often, my boy--certainly not until you can afford it. It is costly
travelling. Maybe once or twice a year."

"Oh, then there's no use talking, I can't go. I can't--can't, be away
from you that long. That's going to be the hardest part." He had
started from his seat and, stood over her, a look of determination on
his face.

"Oh, yes, you can, my son, and you will," she replied, as she too rose
and stood beside him, stopping the outburst of his weakness with her
calm voice, and quieting and soothing him with the soft touch of her
hand, caressing his cheek with her fingers as she had so often done
when he, a baby, had lain upon her breast.

Then with a smile on her face, she had kissed him good-night, closed
the door, and staggering along the corridor steadying herself as she
walked, her hand on the walls, had thrown herself upon her bed in an
agony of tears, crying out:

"Oh, my boy--my boy! How can I give you up? And I know it is forever!"

And now here he is foot-sore and heart-sore, sitting in Union Square,
New York, the roar of the great city in his ears, and here he must sit
until the cattle-barge which takes him every night to the house of Amos
Cobb's friend is ready to start on her voyage up the river.

He sat with his head in his hands, his elbows on his knees, not
stirring until a jar on the other end of the bench roused him. A negro
hod-carrier, splashed with plaster, and wearing a ragged shirt and a
crownless straw hat, had taken a seat beside him. The familiarity of
the act startled Oliver. No negro wayfarer would have dared so much in
his own Square at home.

The man reached forward and drew closer to his own end of the bench a
bundle of sawed ends and bits of wood which he had carried across the
park on his shoulder.

Oliver watched him for a moment, with a feeling amounting almost to
indignation. "Were the poverty and the struggle of a great city to
force such familiarities upon him," he wondered. Then something in the
negro's face, as he wiped the perspiration from his forehead with the
back of his hand, produced a sudden change of feeling. "Was this man,
too, without work?" Oliver asked himself, as he felt the negro's
weariness, and realized for the first time, the common heritage of all
men.

"Are you tired, Uncle?" he asked.

"Yes, a little mite. I been a-totin' dis kindlin' from way up yander in
Twenty-third Street where the circus useter be. Dey's buildin' a big
hotel dere now--de Fifth Avenue dey calls it. I'm a-carryin' mortar for
de brick-layers an' somehow dese sticks is monst'ous heavy after
workin' all day."

"Where do you live?" asked Oliver, his eyes on the kindling-wood.

"Not far from here, sah; little way dis side de Bow'ry. Whar's yo'r
home?" And the old man rose to his feet and picked up his bundle.

The question staggered Oliver. He had no home, really none that he
could call his own--not now.

"Oh, a long way from here," he answered, thoughtfully, without raising
his head, his voice choking.

The old negro gazed at him for a moment, touched his hat respectfully,
and walked toward the gate. At the entrance he wheeled about, balanced
the bundle of wood on his shoulder and looked back at Oliver, who had
resumed his old position, his eyes on the ground. Then he walked away,
muttering:

"'Pears like he's one o' my own people calling me uncle. Spec' he ain't
been long from his mammy."

Two street-rats now sneaked up toward Oliver, watched him for a moment,
and whispered to each other. One threw a stone which grazed Oliver's
head, the other put his hand to his mouth and yelled: "Spad, spad," at
the top of his voice. Oliver understood the epithet, it meant that he
wore clean linen, polished shoes, and perhaps, now and then, a pair of
gloves. He had heard the same outcry in his own city, for the slang of
the street-rat is Volapuk the world over. But he did not resent the
assault. He was too tired to chase any boys, and too despondent to
answer their taunts.

A constable, attracted by the cries of the boys, now passed in front of
him swinging his long staff. He was about to tap Oliver's knees with
one end of it, as a gentle reminder that he had better move on, when
something in the young man's face or appearance made him change his
mind.

"Hi, sonny," he cried, turning quickly and facing Olivr, "yer can't bum
round here after ten, ye know. Keep yer eyes peeled for them gates,
d'ye hear?"

If Oliver heard he made no reply. He was in no mood to dispute the
officer's right to order him about. The gates were not the only
openings shut in his face, he thought to himself; everything seemed
closed against him in this great city. It was not so at home on Kennedy
Square. Its fence, was a shackly, moss-covered, sagging old fence,
intertwined with honeysuckles, full of holes and minus many a paling;
where he could have found a dozen places to crawl through. He had done
so only a few weeks before with Sue in a mad frolic across the Square.
Besides, why should the constable speak to him at all? He knew all
about the hour of closing the New York gates without the policeman
reminding him of it. Had he not sat here every night waiting for that
cattle-boat? He hated the place cordially, yet it was the only spot in
that great city to which he could come and not be molested while he
waited for the barges. He always selected this particular bench because
it was nearest the gate that led to the bronze horse. He loved to look
at its noble contour silhouetted against the sky or illumined by the
street-lamps, and was seldom too tired to be inspired by it. He had
never seen any work in sculpture to be compared to it, and for the
first few days after his arrival, he was never content to end the day's
tramping until he stood beneath it, following its outlines, his heart
swelling with pride at the thought that one of his own nationality and
not a European had created it. He wished that his father, who believed
so in the talent of his countrymen, could see it.

Suddenly, while he was still resenting the familiarity of the
constable, his ears were assailed by the cry of a dog in pain; some
street-rat had kicked him.

Instantly Oliver was on his feet. A small spaniel was running toward
him, followed by half a dozen boys who were pelting him with stones.

Oliver sprang forward as the dog crouched at his feet; caught him up in
his arms and started for the rats, who dodged behind the tree-trunks,
calling "Spad, spad," as they ran. Then came the voice of the same
constable.

"Hi, yer can't bring that dog in here."

"He's not my dog, somebody has hurt him," said Oliver in an indifferent
tone, examining carefully the dog's legs to see if any bones were
broken.

"If that ain't your dog what yer doin' with him? See here, I been
a-watchin' ye. Yer got ter move on or I'll run ye in. D'ye moind?"

Oliver's eyes flashed. In all his life no man had ever doubted his
word, nor had anyone ever spoken to him in such terms.

"You can do as you please, but I will take care of this dog, no matter
what happens. You ought to be ashamed of yourself to see him hurt, and
not want to protect him. You're a pretty kind of an officer."

A crowd began to gather.

Oliver was standing with the dog under one arm, holding the little
fellow close to his breast, the other bent with fist tight shut as if
to defend himself.

"I am, am I? yer moon-faced spad! I'll show ye," and he sprang toward
Oliver.

"Here now, Tim Murphy," came a sharp voice, "kape yer hands off the
young gintleman. He ain't a-doin' nothin', and he ain't done nothin'.
Thim divils hit the dog, I seen 'em myself."

The officer turned quickly and faced a big, broad-shouldered Irish
woman, bare-headed, her sleeves rolled up to her elbows, every line in
her kindly face replete with indignation.

"Don't put yer hands on him, or I'll go to the lock-up an' tell
McManus."

"Oh, it's you, is it, Mrs. Mulligan?" said the officer, in a
conciliatory tone.

"Yes, it's me. The young gintleman's right. It's the b'ys ye oughter
club into shape, not be foolin' yer time over the dog."

"Well, ye know it's agin the rules to let dogs inside the gates," he
retorted as he continued his stroll along the walk, swinging his club
as he went, puffing out his chest and cheeks with his old air as he
moved toward the gate.

"Yes, an' so it's agin the rules," she called after him, "to have them
rapscallions yellin' like mad an' howlin' bloody murder when a body
comes up here to git a breath o' air."

"Is the dog hurt, sir?" and she stepped close to Oliver and laid her
big hand on the dog's head, as it lay nestling close to Oliver's side.

"No, I don't think so--he would have been if I had not got him."

The dog, under the caress, raised his head, and a slight movement of
his tail expressed his pleasure. Then his ears shot forward. A young
man about Oliver's own age was rapidly walking up the path, with a
quick, springy step, whistling as he came. The dog, with a sudden
movement, squirmed himself from under Oliver's arm and sprang toward
him.

"Oh, it's you, Mr. Fred, is it?" broke out the woman, "and it's Miss
Margaret's dog, too. Of course it's her dog, an' I was that dumb I
didn't know it. But it's not me ye can thank for savin' its skin--it's
the young gintleman here. Them divils would have killed it but for him."

"Is the dog yours, sir?" asked Oliver, raising his hat with that
peculiar manner of his which always won him friends at first sight.

"No, I wish it were. It's Miss Margaret Grant's dog--one of our
students. I am taking care of it while she is away. The little rascal
ran out and got into the Square before I knew it. I live right across
the street--you can see my house from here. Miss Grant will be ever so
much obliged to you for protecting him."

"Oh, don't mention it. I got hold of him just in time, or these
ruffians would have hurt him. I think the old lady here, however, is
most to be thanked. We might both have been locked up," he added,
smiling, "if she had not interfered. You know her, it seems."

"Yes, she's Mother Mulligan, as we call her. She's janitress of the
Academy of Design, where I draw at night. My name's Fred Stone. Come
over to where I live--it's only a step," and he looked straight into
Oliver's face, his big blue eyes never wavering.

"Well, I will if you don't think it's too late," and the two young
fellows, with a wave of their hands to the old woman, left the Square,
the dog bounding before them.

Within the hour--in less time indeed, for the friendly light in the
eyes of his new-found friend had shone straight into our boy's soul,
warming and cheering him to his finger-tips, opening his heart, and
bringing out all his secrets--Oliver had told Fred the story of his
fruitless tramps for work; of his mother's hopes and fears; of his own
ambitions and his aims. And Fred, his own heart wide open, had told
Oliver with equal frankness the story of his own struggles; of his
leaving his father's farm in the western part of the State, and of his
giving up everything to come to New York to study art.

It was the old, old story of two chance acquaintances made friends by
reason of the common ground of struggle and privation on which they
stood; comrades fighting side by side in the same trenches for the same
end, and both dreaming of the morrow which would always bring victory
and never death. A story told without reserve, for the disappointments
of life had not yet dulled their enthusiasm, nor had the caution
acquired by its many bitter experiences yet checked the free flow of
their confidences.

To Oliver, in his present despondent mood, the hand held out to him was
more than the hand of a comrade. It was the hand of a strong swimmer
thrust into the sea to save a drowning man. There were others then
besides himself, he thought, as he grasped it, who were making this
fight for bread and glory; there was something else in the great city
besides cruelty and misery, money-getting and money-spending--something
of unselfishness, sympathy and love.

The two sat on the steps of Fred's boarding-house--that house where
Oliver was to spend so many happy days of his after-life--until there
was only time enough to catch the barge. Reluctantly he bade his
new-found comrade good-by and, waving his hand, turned the corner in
the direction of the dock.

The edge of Oliver's cloud had at last caught the light!




CHAPTER VIII

AN OLD SONG


Not only had the sunshine of a new friendship illumined the edge of
Oliver's clouds, but before the week was out a big breeze laden with
success had swept them so far out to sea, that none but the clearest of
skies radiant with hope now arched above his happy face.

A paste-board sign had wrought this miracle.

One day he had been tramping the lower parts of the city, down among
the docks, near Coenties Slip, looking up the people who on former
visits had said: "Some other time, perhaps," or "If we should have room
for another man we will be glad to remember you," or "We know Mr. Cobb,
and shall be pleased," etc., etc., when he chanced to espy a strange
sign tacked outside a warehouse door, a sign which bore the
unheard-of-announcement--unheard of to Oliver, especially the last
word, "Shipping Clerk WANTED."

No one, for weeks, had WANTED anything that Oliver could furnish.
Strangely enough too, as he afterward discovered, the bullet-headed
Dutch porter had driven the last tack into the clean, white, welcome
face of the sign only five minutes before Oliver stopped in front of
it. Still more out of the common, and still more incomprehensible, was
the reply made to him by the head salesman, whom he found just inside
the door--a wiry, restless little man with two keen black eyes, and a
perfectly bald head.

"Yes, if you can mark boxes decently; can show any references; don't
want too much pay, and can come NOW. We're short of a boy, and it's our
busy season."

Oh! blessed be Mr. Crocker, thought Oliver, as he picked up a
marking-brush, stirred it round and round in the tin pot filled with
lamp-black and turpentine, and to his own and the clerk's delight,
painted, on a clean board, rapidly and clearly, and in new letters
too--new to the clerk--the full address of the bald-headed man's
employers:

  MORTON, SLADE & CO.,
  121 PEARL STREET, NEW YORK.

More amazing still were the announcements made by the same bald-headed
man after Oliver had shown him Amos Cobb's recommendations: Oliver was
to come to work in the morning, the situation to be permanent provided
Cobb confirmed by letter the good wishes he had previously expressed,
and provided Mr. Morton, the senior partner, approved of the
bald-head's action; of which the animated billiard-ball said there was
not the slightest doubt as he, the ball, had charge of the shipping
department, and was responsible for its efficiency.

All of these astounding, incomprehensible and amazing occurrences
Oliver had written to his mother, ending his letter by declaring in his
enthusiasm that it was his art, after all, which had pulled him
through, and that but for his readiness with the brush, he would still
be a tramp, instead of "rolling in luxury on the huge sum of eight
dollars a week, with every probability of becoming a partner in the
house, and later on a millionnaire." To which the dear lady had
replied, that she was delighted to know he had pleased his employers,
but that what had pleased her most was his never having lost heart
while trying to win his first fight, adding: "The second victory will
come more easily, my darling boy, and so will each one hereafter." Poor
lady, she never knew how sore that boy's feet had been, nor how many
times he had gone with half a meal or none at all, for fear of
depleting too much the small store she had given him when he left home.

With his success still upon him, he had sallied forth to call upon
young Fred Stone who had grasped his hand so warmly the night he had
rescued the dog from the street-boys, and whose sympathy had gone out
to him so freely. He had written him of his good fortune, and Fred had
replied, begging him to call upon him, and had appointed this same
Friday night as the night of all others when he could entertain him
best.

But Oliver is not the same boy who said good-by to Fred that moonlight
night the week before. His eyes are brighter; his face is a-glow with
ill-concealed pleasure. Even his step shows the old-time spring and
lightness of the days at home--on his toes part of the time, as if
restraining an almost uncontrollable impulse to stop and throw one or
two hand-springs just to relieve the pressure on his nerves.

When he reached the bench in the Square where he had sat so many nights
with his head in his hands, one of those quick outbursts of enthusiasm
took possession of him, the kind that sets young hearts singing with
joy when some sudden shift of hope's kaleidoscope opens a wide horizon
brilliant with the light of future success. With an exclamation of
boyish glee he plumped himself down upon the hard planks of the bench,
and jumped up again, pirouetting on his toe and slanting his hat over
one eye as if in a spirit of sheer bravado against fate. Then he
sauntered out of the iron gate to Fred's house.

Even as he waited on the stone steps of Miss Teeturn's boarding-house
for the dowdy servant-girl's return--such dirty, unkempt steps as they
were, and such a dingy door-plate, spotted with rain and dust, not like
Malachi's, he thought--he could hardly restrain himself from beating
Juba with his foot, a plantation trick Malachi had taught him, keeping
time the while with the palms of his hands on his shapely legs.

Meanwhile another young enthusiast is coming downstairs three steps at
a time, this one bare-headed, all out of breath, and without a coat,
who pours out his heart to the first Juba-beating enthusiast as the two
climb the stairs together to the second enthusiast's room on the very
top floor. He tells him of his delight at seeing him again and of the
lot of fellows waiting to welcome him under the skylight; and of what a
jolly lot the "Skylarkers" really are; and of Mr. Slade, Oliver's
employer, whom Fred knows and who comes from Fred's own town; and of
how much Mr. Slade likes a certain new clerk, one Oliver Horn, of
Kennedy Square, he having said so the night before, this same Horn
being the precise individual whose arm at that very moment was locked
in Fred's own and which was now getting an extra squeeze merely for the
purposes of identification.

All of this Fred poured into Oliver's willing ear without stopping to
take breath, as they mounted the four long flights of stairs that led
to the top floor, where, under the roof, there lived a group of
Bohemians as unique in their personalities as could be found the great
city over.

When the two pairs of feet had at last reached the last flight of steps
under the flat roof of the house, the "Skylarkers" were singing "Old
Dog Tray" at the top of their voices, to the accompaniment of a piano,
and of some other instruments, the character of which our young hero
failed to recognize, although the strains had grown louder and louder
as the young men mounted the stairs.

As Oliver stood in the open doorway and looked in through the haze of
tobacco-smoke upon the group, he instantly became conscious that a new
world had opened before him; a world, as he had always pictured it,
full of mystery and charm, peopled by a race as fascinating to him as
any Mr. Crocker had ever described, and as new and strange as if its
members had been the denizens of another planet.

The interior was not a room, but a square low-ceiled hall into which
opened some six or more small bedrooms, slept in, whenever sleep was
possible, by an equal number of Miss Teetum's boarders. The
construction and appointments of this open garret, with two exceptions,
were similar to those of all other garrets of its class: it had walls
and ceiling, once whitewashed, and now discolored by roof-leaks from a
weather-beaten skylight; its floor was bare of carpet, and its
well-worn woodwork was stained with time and use. Chairs, however, were
scarce, most of the boarders and their guests being seated on the floor.

The two exceptions, already noted, were some crisp, telling sketches,
big and little, in color and black-and-white, the work of the artist
members of this coterie, which covered every square inch of the
leak-stained surface of ceiling and wall, and the yellow-keyed,
battered piano which occupied the centre of the open space and which
stood immediately under two flaring gas-jets. At the moment of Fred's
and Oliver's arrival the top of this instrument was ornamented by two
musically inclined gentlemen, one seated cross-legged like a Turk,
voicing the misfortunes of Dog Tray, the other, with his legs resting
on a chair, beating time to the melody with a cane. This cane, at short
intervals, he brought down upon the shoulders of any ambitious member
who attempted to usurp his place. The chief object of the gathering, so
far as Oliver's hasty glance could determine, was undoubtedly the
making of as much noise as possible.

While the young men stood looking into the room waiting for the song to
cease prior to Oliver's entry and introduction, Fred whispered
hurriedly into his guest's ear some of the names, occupations, and
characteristics of the group before him.

The cross-legged man with the long neck, drooping mustache, and ropy
black hair, was none other than Bowdoin, the artist--the only American
who had taken a medal at Munich for landscape, but who was now painting
portraits and starving slowly in consequence. He mounted to this eyry
every Friday night, so as to be reminded of the good old days at
Schwartz's. The short, big-mustached, bald-headed man swinging the
cane, was Bianchi--Julius Bianchi--known to the Skylarkers as "The
Pole," and to the world at large as an accomplished lithographer and
maker of mezzotints. Bianchi was a piece of the early artistic
driftwood cast upon our shores--an artist every inch of him--drawing
from life, and handling the crayon like a master.

The pale-faced young fellow at the piano, with bulging watch-crystal
eye-glasses and hair tucked behind his ears, was the well-known,
all-round musician, Wenby Simmons--otherwise known as "Pussy Me-ow"--a
name associated in some way with the strings of his violin. This
virtuoso played in the orchestra at the Winter Garden, and occupied the
bedroom next to Fred's.

The clean-shaven, well-groomed young Englishman standing behind Simmons
and holding a coal-scuttle half full of coal which he shook with
deafening jangle to help swell the chorus, was "My Lord Cockburn" so
called--an exchange clerk in a banking-house. He occupied the room
opposite Fred's.

With the ending of the chorus Fred Stone stepped into the open space
with his arm through that of his guest, and the noise was hushed long
enough for the entire party to welcome the young Southerner--a welcome
which kindled into a glow of enthusiasm when they caught the look of
frank undisguised pleasure which lighted his face, and noticed the
unaffected bow with which he entered the room, shaking hands with each
one as Fred introduced him--and all with that warm, hearty, simple,
courteous manner peculiar to his people.

The slight ceremony over--almost every Friday night some new guest was
welcomed--Fred seated himself on the floor with his back to the
whitewashed wall, although two chairs were at once offered them, and
made room for Oliver, who settled down beside him.

As they sat leaning back, Oliver's eyes wandering over the room
drinking in the strange, fascinating scene before him, as bewildering
as it was unexpected, Fred--now that they were closer to the scene of
action, again whispered or shouted, as the suddenly revived noise
permitted, into Oliver's alert and delighted ears, such additional
facts concerning the other members present as he thought would interest
his guest.

The fat man behind the piano astride of a chair, a pipe in his mouth
and a black velvet skull-cap on his head, was Tom Waller, the
sheep-painter-Thomas Brandon Waller, he signed it--known as the Walrus.
He, too, was a boarder and a delightful fellow, although an habitual
grumbler. His highest ambition was to affix an N. A. at the end of his
name, but he had failed of election by thirty votes out of forty cast.
That exasperating event he had duly celebrated at Pfaff's in various
continued libations covering a week, and had accordingly, on many
proper and improper occasions, renewed and recelebrated the event,
breathing out meanwhile, between his pewter mugs, scathing anathemas
against the "idiots" who had defeated him out of his just rights, and
who were stupid enough to believe in the school of Verboeckhoeven.
Slick and shiny Verboeckhoeven, "the mechanic," he would call him, with
his fists closed tight, who painted the hair on every one of his sheep
as if it were curled by a pair of barber's tongs--not dirty and woolly
and full of suggestions as, of course, he--the great Waller, alone of
all living animal-painters--depicted it. All of which, to Waller's
credit, it must be parenthetically stated, these same "idiots" learned
to recognize in after years as true, when that distinguished
animal-painter took a medal at the Salon for the same picture which the
Jury of N. A.'s had rejected at their Spring Exhibition.

The irreproachable, immaculate young person, with eyes half-closed,
lying back in the arm-chair--one which he had brought from his own
room--was "Ruffle-shirt" Tomlins. He was the only member who dressed
every day for dinner, whether he was going out afterward or
not--spike-tailed coat, white tie and all. Tomlins not only knew
intimately a lady of high degree who owned a box at the Academy of
Music, in Fourteenth Street, and who invited him to sit in it at least
once a season, but he had besides a large visiting acquaintance among
the people of quality living on Irving Place. A very agreeable and
kindly little man was "Ruffle-shirt" Tomlins--so Fred said--the sort of
a little man whose philosophy of life was based on the possibility of
catching more innocent, unwary flies with honey than he could with
