with her when I don't feel like it. It just doesn't work that way. I felt sorry for
Mother -- very, very sorry -- because for the first time in my life I noticed she
wasn't indifferent to my coldness. I saw the sorrow in her face when she talked about
not being able to make me love her. It's hard to tell the truth, and yet the truth is
that she's the one who's rejected me. She's the one whose tactless comments and
cruel jokes about matters I don't think are funny have made me insensitive to any sign
of love on her part. Just as my heart sinks every time I hear her harsh words, that's
how her heart sank when she realized there was no more love between us.
She cried half the night and didn't get any sleep. Father has avoided looking at me,
and if his eyes do happen to cross mine, I can read his unspoken words: "How can
you be so unkind? How dare you make your mother so sad!"
Everyone expects me to apologize, but this is not something I can apologize for,
because I told the truth, and sooner or later Mothjr was bound to find out anyway. I
seem to be indifferent to Mother's tears and Father's glances, and I am, because both
of them are now feeling what I've always felt. I can only feel sorry for Mother, who
will have to figure out what her attitude should be all by herself. For my part, I will
continue to remain silent and aloof, and I don't intend to shrink from the truth,
because the longer it's postponed, the harder it will be for them to accept it when
they do hear it!
Yours, Anne
TUESDAY, APRIL 27, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
The house is still trembling from the aftereffects of the quarrels. Everyone is mad at
everyone else: Mother and I, Mr. van Daan and Father, Mother and Mrs. van D.
Terrific atmosphere, don't you think? Once again Anne's usual list of shortcomings has
been extensively aired.
Our German visitors were back last Saturday. They stayed until six. We all sat
upstairs, not daring to move an inch. If there's no one else working in the building or
in the neighborhood, you can hear every single step in the private office. I've got
ants in my pants again from having to sit still so long.
Mr. Voskuijl has been hospitalized, but Mr. Kleiman's back at the office. His stomach
stopped bleeding sooner than it normally does. He told us that the County Clerk's
Office took an extra beating because the firemen flooded the entire building instead of
just putting out the fire. That does my heart good!
The Carlton Hotel has been destroyed. Two British planes loaded with firebombs
landed right on top of the
German Officers' Club. The entire corner of Vijzelstraat and Singel has gone up in
flames. The number of air strikes on German cities is increasing daily. We haven't had
a good night's rest in ages, and I have bags under my eyes from lack of sleep.
Our food is terrible. Breakfast consists of plain, unbuttered brea and ersatz coffee. For
the last two weeks lunch has been e. spinach or cooked lettuce with huge potatoes
that have a rotten, sweetish taste. If you're trying to diet, the Annex is the place to
be! Upstairs they complain bitterly, but we don't think it's such a tragedy.
All the Dutch men who either fought or were mobilized in 1940 have been called up
to work in prisoner-of-war camps. I bet they're taking this precaution because of the
invasion!
Yours, Anne
SATURDAY, MAY 1, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
Yesterday was Dussel's birthday. At first he acted as if he didn't want to celebrate it,
but when Miep arrived with a large shopping bag overflowing with gifts, he was as
excited as a little kid. His darling' 'Lotje" has sent him eggs, butter, cookies,
lemonade, bread, cognac, spice cake, flowers, oranges, chocolate, books and writing
paper. He piled his presents on a table and displayed them for no fewer than three
days, the silly old goat!
You mustn't get the idea that he's starving. We found bread, cheese, jam and eggs in
his cupboard. It's absolutely disgraceful that Dussel, whom we've treated with such
kindness and whom we took in to save from destruction, should stuff himself behind
our backs and not give us anything. After all, we've shared all we had with him! But
what's worse, in our opinion, is that he's so stingy with respect to Mr. Kleiman, Mr.
Voskuijl and Bep. He doesn't give them a thing. In Dussel's view the oranges that
Kleiman so badly needs for his sick stomach will benefit his own stomach even more.
Tonight the guns have been banging away so much that I've already had to gather up
my belongings four times. Today I packed a suitcase Wl f;the stuff I'd need in case
we had to flee, but as M ther correctly noted,
"Where would you go?"
All of Holland is being punishe or the workers' strikes. Martial law has been declared,
and everyone is going to get one less butter coupon. What naughty children.
I washed Mother's hair this evening, which is no easy task these days. We have to
use a very sticky liquid cleanser because there's no more shampoo. Besides that,
Moms had a hard time combing her hair because the family comb has only ten teeth
left.
Yours, Anne
SUNDAY, MAY 2, 1943
When I think about our lives here, I usually come to the conclusion that we live in a
paradise compared to the Jews who aren't in hiding. All the same, later on, when
everything has returned to normal, I'll probably wonder how we, who always lived in
such comfortable circumstances, could have "sunk" so low. With respect to manners, I
mean. For example, the same oilcloth has covered the dining table ever since we've
been here. After so much use, it's hardly what you'd call spotless. I do my best to
clean it, but since the dishcloth was also purchased before we went into hiding and
consists of more holes than cloth, it's a thankless task. The van Daans have been
sleeping all winter long on the same flannel sheet, which can't be washed because
detergent is rationed and in short supply. Besides, it's of such poor quality that it's
practically useless. Father is walking around in frayed trousers, and his tie is also
showing signs of wear and tear. Mama's corset snapped today and is beyond repair,
while Margot is wearing a bra that's two sizes too small, Mother and Margot have
shared the same three undershorts the entire winter, and mine are so small they don't
even cover my stomach. These are all things that can be overcome, but I sometimes
wonder: how can we, whose every possession, from my underpants to Father's shaving
brush, is so old and worn, ever hope to regain the position we had before the war?
SUNDAY, MAY 2, 1943
The Attitude of the Annex Residents Toward the War
Mr. van Daan. In the opinion of us all, this revered gentleman has great insight into
politics. Nevertheless, he predicts we'll have to stay here until the end of '43. That's
a very long time, and yet it's possible to hold out until then. But who can assure us
that this war, which has caused nothing but pain and sorrow, will then be over? And
that nothing will have happened to us and our helpers long before that time? No one!
That's why each and every day is filled with tension. Expectation and hope generate
tension, as does fear -- for example, when we hear a noise inside or outside the
house, when the guns go off or when we read new "proclamations" in the paper, since
we're afraid our helpers might be forced to go into hiding themselves sometime. These
days everyone is talking about having to hide. We don't know how many people are
actually in hiding; of course, the number is relatively small compared to the general
population, but later on we'll no doubt be astonished at how many good people in
Holland were willing to take Jews and Christians, with or without money, into their
homes. There're also an unbelievable number of people with false identity papers.
Mrs. van Daan. When this beautiful damsel (by her own account) heard that it was
getting easier these days to obtain false IDs, she immediately proposed that we each
have one made. As if there were nothing to it, as if Father and Mr. van Daan were
made of money.
Mrs. van Daan is always sating the most ridiculous things, and her Putti is often
exasperated. But that's not surprising, because one day Kerli announces, "When this is
allover, I'm going to have myself baptized"; and the next, "As long as I can remember,
I've wanted to go to Jerusalem. I only feel at home with other jews!"
Pim is a big optimist, but he always has his reasons.
Mr. Dussel makes up everything as he goes along, and anyone wishing to contradict
His Majesty had better think twice. In Alfred Dussel's home his word is law, but that
doesn't suit Anne Frank in the least.
What the other members of the Annex family think about the war doesn't matter.
When it comes to politics, these four are the only ones who count. Actually, only two
of them do, but Madame van Daan and Dussel include themselves as well.
TUESDAY, MAY 18, 1943
Dearest Kit,
I recently witnessed a fierce dogfight between German and English pilots.
Unfortunately, a couple of Allied airmen had to jump out of their burning plane. Our
milkman, who lives in Halfweg, saw four Canadians sitting along the side of the road,
and one of them spoke fluent Dutch. He asked the milkman if he had a light for his
cigarette, and then told him the crew had consisted of six men. The pilot had been
burned to death, and the fifth crew member had hidden himself somewhere. The
German Security Police came to pick up the four remaining men, none of whom were
injured. After parachuting out of a flaming plane, how can anyone have such presence
of mind?
Although it's undeniably hot, we have to light a fire every other day to burn our
vegetable peelings and garbage. We can't throw anything into trash cans, because the
warehouse employees might see it. One small act of carelessness and we're done for!
All college students are being asked to sign an official statement to the effect that
they "sympathize with the Germans and approve of the New Order." Eighty percent
have decided to obey the dictates of their conscience, but the penalty will be severe.
Any student refusing to sign will be sent to a German labor camp. What's to become
of the youth of our country if they've all got to do hard labor in Germany?
Last night the guns were making so much noise that Mother shut the window; I was
in Pim's bed. Suddenly, right above our heads, we heard Mrs. van D. leap up, as if
she'd been bitten by Mouschi. This was followed by a loud boom, which sounded as if
a firebomb had landed beside my bed. "Lights! Lights!" I screamed.
Pim switched on the lamp. I expected the room to burst into flames any minute.
Nothing happened. We all rushed upstairs to see what was going on. Mr. and Mrs. van
D. had seen a red glow through the open window, and he thought there was a fire
nearby, while she was certain our house was ablaze. Mrs. van D. was already standing
beside her bed with her knees knocking when the boom came. Dussel stayed upstairs
to smoke a cigarette, and we crawled back into bed. Less than fifteen minutes later
the shooting started again. Mrs. van D. sprang out of bed and went downstairs to
Dussel' s room to seek the comfort she was unable to find with her spouse. Dussel
welcomed her with the words "Come into my bed, my child!"
We burst into peals of laughter, and the roar of the guns bothered us no more; our
fears had all been swept away.
Yours, Anne
SUNDAY, JUNE 13, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
The poem Father composed for my birthday is too nice to keep to myself.
Since Pim writes his verses only in German, Margot volunteered to translate it into
Dutch. See for yourself whether Margot hasn't done herself proud. It begins with the
usual summary of the year's events and then continues:
As youngest among us, but small no more,
Your life can be trying, for we have the chore
Of becoming your teachers, a terrible bore.
"We've got experience! Take it from me!"
"We've done this all before, you see.
We know the ropes, we know the same."
Since time immemorial, always the same.
One's own shortcomings are nothing but fluff,
But everyone else's are heavier stuff:
Faultfinding comes easy when this is our plight,
But it's hard for your parents, try as they might,
To treat you with fairness, and kindness as well;
Nitpicking's a habit that's hard to dispel.
Men you're living with old folks, all you can do
Is put up with their nagging -- it's hard but it's true.
The pill may be bitter, but down it must go,
For it's meant to keep the peace, you know.
The many months here have not been in vain,
Since wasting time noes against your Brain.
You read and study nearly all the day,
Determined to chase the boredom away.
The more difficult question, much harder to bear,
Is "What on earth do I have to wear?
I've got no more panties, my clothes are too tight,
My shirt is a loincloth, I'm really a siaht!
To put on my shoes I must off my toes,
Dh dear, I'm plagued with so many woes!"
Margot had trouble getting the part about food to rhyme, so I'm leaving it out. But
aside from that, don't you think it's a good poem?
For the rest, I've been thoroughly spoiled and have received a number of lovely
presents, including a big book on my favorite subject, Greek and Roman mythology.
Nor can I complain about the lack of candy; everyone had dipped into their last
reserves. As the Benjamin of the Annex, I got more than I deserve.
Yours, Anne
TUESDAY, JUNE 15, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
Heaps of things have happened, but I often think I'm boring you with my dreary
chitchat and that you'd just as soon have fewer letters. So I'll keep the news brief.
Mr. Voskuijl wasn't operated on for his ulcer after all. Once the doctors had him on
the operating table and opened him up, they saw that he had cancer. It was in such an
advanced stage that an operation was pointless. So they stitched him up again, kept
him in the hospital for three weeks, fed him well and sent him back home. But they
made an unforgivable error: they told the poor man exactly what was in store for him.
He can't work anymore, and he's just sitting at home, surrounded by his eight children,
brooding about his approaching death. I feel very sorry for him and hate not being able
to go out; otherwise, I'd visit him as often as I could and help take his mind off
matters. Now the good man can no longer let us know what's being said and done in
the warehouse, which is a disaster for us. Mr. Voskuijl was our greatest source of
help and suppor when it came to safety measures. We miss him very much.
Next month it's our turn to hand over our radio to the authorities. Mr. Kleiman has a
small set hidden in his home that he's giving us to replace our beautiful cabinet radio.
It's a pity we have to turn in our big Philips, but when you're in hiding, you can't
afford to bring the authorities down on your heads. Of course, we'll put the "baby"
radio upstairs. What's a clandestine radio when there are already clandestine Jews and
clandestine money?
All over the country people are trying to get hold of an old radio that they can hand
over instead of their "morale booster." It's true: as the reports from outside grow
worse and worse, the radio, with its wondrous voice, helps us not to lose heart and to
keep telling ourselves, "Cheer up, keep your spirits high, things are bound to get
better!"
Yours, Anne
SUNDAY, JULY 11, 1943
Dear Kitty,
To get back to the subject of child-rearing (for the umpteenth time), let me tell you
that I'm doing my best to be helpful, friendly and kind and to do all I can to keep the
rain of rebukes down to a light drizzle. It's not easy trying to behave like a model
child with people you can't stand, especially when you don't mean a word of it. But I
can see that a little hypocrisy gets me a lot further than myoid method of saying
exactly what I think (even though no one ever asks my opinion or cares one way or
another). Of course, I often forget my role and find it impossible to curb my anger
when they're unfair, so that they spend the next month saying the most impertinent
girl in the world. Don't you think I'm to be pitied sometimes? It's a good thing I'm not
the grouchy type, because then I might become sour and bad-tempered. I can usually
see the humorous side of their scoldings, but it's easier when somebody else is being
raked over the coals.
Further, I've decided (after a great deal of thought) to drop the shorthand. First, so
that I have more time for my other subjects, and second, because of my eyes. That's
a sad story. I've become very nearsighted and should have had glasses ages ago.
(Ugh, won't I look like a dope!). But as you know, people in hiding can't. . .
Yesterday all anyone here could talk about was Anne's eyes, because Mother had
suggested I go to the ophthalmologist with Mrs. Kleiman. Just hearing this made my
knees weak, since it's no small matter. Going outside! Just think of it, walking down
the street! I can't imagine it. I was petrified at first, and then glad. But it's not as
simple as all that; the various authorities who had to approve such a step were unable
to reach a quick decision. They first had to carefully weigh all the difficulties and
risks, though Miep was ready to set off immediately with me in tow. In the meantime,
I'd taken my gray coat from the closet, but it was so small it looked as if it might
have belonged to my little sister. We lowered the hem, but I still couldn't button it.
I'm really curious to see what they decide, only I don't think they'll ever work out a
plan, because the British have landed in Sicily and Father's all set for a "quick finish."
Bep's been giving Margot and me a lot of office work to do. It makes us both feel
important, and it's a big help to her. Anyone can file letters and make entries in a
sales book, but we do it with remarkable accuracy.
Miep has so much to carry she looks like a pack mule. She goes forth nearly every
day to scrounge up vegetables, and then bicycles back with her purchases in large
shopping bags. She's also the one who brings five library books with her every
Saturday. We long for Saturdays because that means books. We're like a bunch of
little kids with a present. Ordinary people don't know how much books can mean to
someone who's cooped up.
Our only diversions are reading, studying and listening to the radio.
Yours, Anne
TUESDAY, JULY 13, 1943
The Best Little Table
Yesterday afternoon Father gave me permission to ask Mr. Dussel whether he would
please be so good as to allow me (see how polite I am?) to use the table in our room
two afternoons a week, from four to five-thirty. I already sit there every day from
two-thirty to four while Dussel takes a nap, but the rest of the time the room and
the table are off-limits to me. It's impossible to study next door in the afternoon,
because there's too much going on. Besides, Father sometimes likes to sit at the desk
during the afternoon.
So it seemed like a reasonable request, and I asked Dussel very politely. What do you
think the learned gentleman's reply was? "No." Just plain "No!"
I was incensed and wasn't about to let myself be put off like that. I asked him the
reason for his "No," but this didn't get me anywhere. The gist of his reply was: "I
have to study too, you know, and if I can't do that in the afternoons, I won't be able
to fit it in at all. I have to finish the task I've set for myself; otherwise, there's no
point in starting. Besides, you aren't serious about your studies. Mythology -- what
kind of work is that? Reading and knitting don't count either. I use that table and I'm
not going to give it up!"
I replied, "Mr. Dussel, I do take my wsork seriously. I can't study next door in the
afternoons, and I would appreciate it if you would reconsider my request!"
Having said these words, the insulted Anne turned around and pretended the learned
doctor wasn't there. I was seething with rage and felt that Dussel had been incredibly
rude (which he certainly had been) and that I'd been very polite.
That evening, when I managed to get hold of Pim, I told him what had happened and
we discussed what my next step should be, because I had no intention of giving up
and preferred to deal with the matter myself. Pim gave me a rough idea of how to
approach Dussel, but cautioned me to wait until the next day, since I was in such a
flap. I ignored this last piece of advice and waited for Dussel after the dishes had
been done. Pim was sitting next door and that had a calming effect.
I began, "Mr. Dussel, you seem to believe further discussion of the matter is
pointless, but I beg you to reconsider."
Dussel gave me his most charming smile and said, "I'm always prepared to discuss the
matter, even though it's already been settled."
I went on talking, despite Dussel's repeated interruptions. When you first came here,"
I said, "we agreed that the room was to be shared by the two of us. If we were to
divide it fairly, you'd have the entire morning and I'd have the entire afternoon! I'm
not asking for that much, but two afternoons a week does seem reasonable to me."
Dussel leapt out of his chair as if he'd sat on a pin. "You have no business talking
about your rights to the room. Where am I supposed to go? Maybe I should ask Mr.
van Daan to build me a cubbyhole in the attic. You're not the only one who can't find
a quiet place to work. You're always looking for a fight. If your sister Margot, who
has more right to work space than you do, had come to me with the same request, I'd
never even have thought of refusing, but you. . ."
And once again he brought up the business about the mythology and the knitting, and
once again Anne was insulted. However, I showed no sign of it and let Dussel finish:
"But no, it's impossible to talk to you. You're shamefully self-centered. No one else
matters, as long as you get your way. I've never seen such a child. But after all is
said and done, I'll be obliged to let you have your way, since I don't want people
saying later on that Anne Frank failed her exams because Mr. Dussel refused to
relinquish his table!"
He went on and on until there was such a deluge of words I could hardly keep up.
For one fleeting moment I thought, "Him and his lies. I'll smack his ugly mug so hard
he'll go bouncing off the wall!" But the next moment I thought, "Calm down, he's not
worth getting so upset about!"
At long last Mr. Dussel' s fury was spent, and he left the room with an expression of
triumph mixed with wrath, his coat pockets bulging with food.
I went running over to Father and recounted the entire story, or at least those parts
he hadn't been able to follow himself. rim decided to talk to Dussel that very same
evening, and they spoke for more than half an hour.
They first discussed whether Anne should be allowed to use the table, yes or no.
Father said that he and Dussel had dealt with the subject once before, at which time
he'd professed to agree with Dussel because he didn't want to contradict the elder in
front of the younger, but that, even then, he hadn't thought it was fair. Dussel felt I
had no right to talk as if he were an intruder laying claim to everything in sight. But
Father protested strongly, since he himself had heard me say nothing of the kind. And
so the conversation went back and forth, with Father defending my "selfishness" and
my "busywork" and Dussel grumbling the whole time.
Dussel finally had to give in, and I was granted the opportunity to work without
interruption two afternoons a week. Dussel looked very sullen, didn't speak to me for
two days and made sure he occupied the table from five to five-thirty -- all very
childish, of course.
Anyone who's so petty and pedantic at the age of fifty-four was born that way and is
never going to change.
FRIDAY, JULY 16, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
There's been another break-in, but this time a real one! Peter went down to the
warehouse this morning at seven, as usual, and noticed at once that both the
warehouse door and the street door were open. He immediately reported this to Pim,
who went to the private office, tuned the radio to a German station and locked the
door. Then they both went back upstairs. In such cases our orders are not to wash
ourselves or run any water, to be quiet, to be dressed by eight and not to go to the
bathroom," and as usual we followed these to the letter. We were all glad we'd slept
so well and hadn't heard anything. For a while we were indignant because no one from
the office came upstairs the entire morning; Mr. Kleiman left us on tenterhooks until
eleven-thirty. He told that the burglars had forced the outside door and the warehouse
door with a crowbar, but when they didn't find anything worth stealing, they tried
their luck on the next floor. They stole two cashboxes containing 40 guilders, blank
checkbooks and, worst of all, coupons for 330 pounds of sugar, our entire allotment. It
won't be easy to wangle new ones.
Mr. Kugler thinks this burglar belongs to the same gang as the one who made an
unsuccessful attempt six weeks ago to open all three doors (the warehouse door and
the two outside doors).
The burglary caused another stir, but the Annex seems to thrive on excitement.
Naturally, we were glad the cash register and the typewriters had been safely tucked
away in our clothes closet.
Yours, Anne
PS. Landing in Sicily. Another step closer to the . . . !
MONDAY, JULY 19,1943
Dearest Kitty,
North Amsterdam was very heavily bombed on Sunday. There was apparently a great
deal of destruction. Entire streets are in ruins, and it will take a while for them to dig
out all the bodies. So far there have been two hundred dead and countless wounded;
the hospitals are bursting at the seams. We've been told of children searching forlornly
in the smoldering ruins for their dead parents. It still makes me shiver to think of the
dull, distant drone that signified the approaching destruction.
FRIDAY, JULY 23, 1943
Bep is currently able to get hold of notebooks, especially journals and ledgers, useful
for my bookkeeping sister! Other kinds are for sale as well, but don't ask what they're
like or how long they'll last. At the moment \ they're all labeled "No Coupons
Needed!" Like everything else you can purchase without ration stamps, they're i totally
worthless. They consist of twelve sheets of gray I paper with narrow lines that slant
across the page. Margot is thinking about taking a course in calligraphy; I've advised
her to go ahead and do it. Mother won't let me because of my eyes, but I think that's
silly. Whether I do I that or something else, it all comes down to the same I thing.
Since you've never been through a war, Kitty, and since you know very little about
life in hiding, in spite of my letters, let me tell you, just for fun, what we each want
to do first when we're able to go outside again.
Margot and Mr. van Daan wish, above all else, to have a hot bath, filled to the brim,
which they can lie in for more than half an hour. Mrs. van Daan would like a cake,
Dussel can think of nothing but seeing his Charlotte, and Mother is dying for a cup of
real coffee. Father would like to visit Mr. Voskuijl, Peter would go downtown, and as
for me, I'd be so overjoyed I wouldn't know where to begin.
Most of all I long to have a home of our own, to be able to move around freely and
have someone help me with my homework again, at last. In other words, to go back to
school!
Bep has offered to get us some fruit, at so-called bargain prices: grapes 2.50 guilders
a pound, gooseberries 70 cents a pound, one peach 50 cents, melons 75 cents a
pound. No wonder the papers write every evening in big, fat letters: "Keep Prices
Down!"
MONDAY, JULY 26, 1943
Dear Kitty,
Yesterday was a very tumultuous day, and we're still all wound up. Actually, you may
wonder if there's ever a day that passes without some kind of excitement.
The first warning siren went off in the morning while we were at breakfast, but we
paid no attention, because it only meant that the planes were crossing the coast. I had
a terrible headache, so I lay down for an hour after breakfast and then went to the
office at around two.
At two-thirty Margot had finished her office work and was just gathering her things
together when the sirens began wailing again. So she and I trooped back upstairs.
None too soon, it seems, for less than five minutes later the guns were booming so
loudly that we went and stood in the hall. The house shook and the bombs kept
falling. I was clutching my "escape bag," more because I wanted to have something to
hold on to than because I wanted to run away. I know we can't leave here, but if we
had to, being seen on the streets would be just as dangerous as getting caught in an
air raid. After half an hour the drone of engines faded and the house began to hum
with activity again. Peter emerged from his lookout post in the front attic, Dussel
remained in the front office, Mrs. van D. felt safest in the private office, Mr. van
Daan had been watching from the loft, and those of us on the landing spread out to
watch the columns of smoke rising from the harbor. Before long the smell of fire was
everywhere, and outside it looked as if the city were enveloped in a thick fog.
A big fire like that is not a pleasant sight, but fortunately for us it was all over, and
we went baCk to our various chores. Just as we were starting dinner: another air-raid
alarm. The food was good, but I lost my appetite the moment I heard the siren.
Nothing happened, however, and forty-five minutes later the all clear was sounded.
After the dishes had been washed: another air-raid warning, gunfire and swarms of
planes. "Oh, gosh, twice in one day," we thought, "that's twice in one day," we
thought, "that's twice too many." Little good that did us, because once agai the bombs
rained down, this time on the others of the city. According to British reports, Schiphol
Airport was bombed. The planes dived and climbed, the air was abuzz with the drone
of engines. It was very scary, and the whole time I kept thinking, "Here it comes, this
is it."
I can assure you that when I went to bed at nine, my legs were still shaking. At the
stroke of midnight I woke up again: more planes! Dussel was undressing, but I took
no notice and leapt up, wide awake, at the sound of the first shot. I stayed in Father's
bed until one, in my own bed until one-thirty, and was back in Father's bed at two.
But the planes kept on coming. At last they stopped firing and I was able to go back
"home" again. I finally fell asleep at half past two.
Seven o'clock. I awoke with a start and sat up in bed. Mr. van Daan was with Father.
My first thought was: burglars. "Everything," I heard Mr. van Daan say, and I thought
everything had been stolen. But no, this time it was wonderful news, the best we've
had in months, maybe even since the war began. Mussolini has resigned and the King
of Italy has taken over the government.
We jumped for joy. After the awful events of yesterday, finally something good
happens and brings us. . . hope! Hope for an end to the war, hope for peace.
Mr. Kugler dropped by and told us that the Fokker aircraft factory had been hit hard.
Meanwhile, there was another air-raid alarm this morning, with planes flying over, and
another warning siren. I've had it up to here with alarms. I've hardly slept, and the
last thing I want to do is work. But now the suspense about Italy and the hope that
the war will be over by the end of the year are keeping us awake. .
Yours, Anne
THURSDAY, JULY 29, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
Mrs. van Daan, Dussel and I were doing the dishes, and I was extremely quiet. This
is very unusual for me and they were sure to notice, so in order to avoid any
questions, I quickly racked my brains for a neutral topic. I thought the book Henry
from Across the Street might fit the bill, but I couldn't have been more wrong; if Mrs.
van Daan doesn't jump down my throat, Mr. Dussel does. It all boiled down to this:
Mr. Dussel had recommended the book to Margot and me as an example of excellent
writing. We thought it was anything but that. The little boy had been portrayed well,
but as for the rest. . . the less said the better. I mentioned something to that effect
while we were doing the dishes, and Dussel launched into a veritable tirade.
"How can you possibly understand the psychology of a man? That of a child isn't so
difficult [!]. But you're far too young to read a book like that. Even a
twenty-year-old man would be unable to comprehend it." (So why did he go out of
his way to recommend it to Margot and me?)
Mrs. van D. and Dussel continued their harangue: "You know way too much about
things you're not supposed to. You've been brought up all wrong. Later on, when
you're older, you won't be able to enjoy anything anymore. You'll say, 'Oh, I read that
twenty years ago in some book.' You'd better hurry if you want to catch a husband or
fall in love, since everything is bound to be a disappointment to you. You already
know all there is to know in theory. But in practice? That's another story!"
Can you imagine how I felt? I astonished myself by calmly replying, "You may think I
haven't been raised properly, but many people would disagree!"
They apparently believe that good child-rearing includes trying to pit me against my
parents, since that's all they ever do. And not telling a girl my age about grown-up
subjects is fine. We can all see what happens when. people are raised that way.
At that moment I could have slapped them both for poking fun at me. I was beside
myself with rage, and if I only knew how much longer we had to put up with each
other's company, I'd start counting the days.
Mrs. van Daan's a fine one to talk! She sets an example all right -- a bad one!
She's known to be exceedingly pushy, egotistical, cunning, calculating and perpetually
dissatisfied. Add to that, vanity and coquettishness and there's no question about it:
she's a thoroughly despicable person. I could write an entire book about Madame van
Daan, and who knows, maybe someday I will. Anyone can put on a charming exterior
when they want to. Mrs. van D. is friendly to strangers, especially men, so it's easy
to make a mistake when you first get to know her.
Mother thinks that Mrs. van D. is too stupid for words, Margot that she's too
unimportant, Pim that she's too ugly (literally and figuratively!), and after long
observation (I'm never prejudiced at the beginning), I've come to the conclusion that
she's all three of the above, and lots more besides. She has so many bad traits, why
should I single out just one of them?
Yours, Anne
P.S. Will the reader please take into consideration that this story was written before
the writer's fury had cooled?
TUESDAY, AUGUST 3, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
Things are going well on the political front. Italy has banned the Fascist Party. The
people are fighting the Fascists in many places -- even the army has joined the
fight. How can a country like that continue to wage war against England?
Our beautiful radio was taken away last week. Dussel was very angry at Mr. Kugler
for turning it in on the appointed day. Dussel is slipping lower and lower in my
estimation, and he's already below zero. hatever he says about politics, history,
geography or ything else is so ridiculous that I hardly dare repeat it: Hitler will fade
from history; the harbor in Rotterdam is bigger than the one in Hamburg; the English
are idiots for not taking the opportunity to bomb Italy to smithereens; etc., etc.
We just had a third air raid. I decided to grit my teeth and practice being courageous.
Mrs. van Daan, the one who always said "Let them fall" and "Better to end with a
bang than not to end at all," is the most cowardly one among us. She was shaking like
a leaf this morning and even burst into tears. She was comforted by her husband, with
whom she recently declared a truce after a week of squabbling; I nearly got
sentimental at the sight.
Mouschi has now proved, beyond a shadow of a doubt, that having a cat has
disadvantages as well as advantages. The whole house is crawling with fleas, and it's
getting worse each day. Mr. Kleiman sprinkled yellow powder in every nook and
cranny, but the fleas haven't taken the slightest notice. It's making us all very jittery;
we're forever imagining a bite on our arms and legs or other parts of our bodies, so
we leap up and do a few exercises, since it gives us an excuse to take a better look
at our arms or necks. But now we're paying the price for having had so little physical
exercise; we're so stiff we can hardly turn our heads. The real calisthenics fell by the
wayside long ago.
Yours, Anne
WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 4,1943
Dearest Kitty,
Now that we've been in hiding for a little over a year, you know a great deal about
our lives. Still, I can't possibly tell you everything, since it's all so different compared
to ordinary times and ordinary people. Nevertheless, to give you a closer look into our
lives, from time to time I'll describe part of an ordinary day. I'll start with the
evening and night.
Nine in the evening. Bedtime always begins in the Annex with an enormous hustle and
bustle. Chairs are shifted, beds pulled out, blankets unfolded -- nothing stays where
it is during the daytime. I sleep on a small divan, which is only five feet long, so we
have to add a few chairs to make it longer. Comforter, sheets, pillows, blankets:
everything has to be removed from Dussel' s bed, where it's kept during the day.
In the next room there's a terrible creaking: that's Margot's folding bed being set up.
More blankets and pillows, anything to make the wooden slats a bit more comfortable.
Upstairs it sounds like thunder, but it's only Mrs. van D.'s bed being shoved against
the window so that Her Majesty, arrayed in her pink bed jacket, can sniff the night air
through her delicate little nostrils.
Nine o'clock. After Peter's finished, it's my turn for the bathroom. I wash myself from
head to toe, and more often than not I find a tiny flea floating in the sink (only
during the hot months, weeks or days). I brush my teeth, curl my hair, manicure my
nails and dab peroxide on my upper lip to bleach the black hairs -- all this in less
than half an hour.
Nine-thirty. I throw on my bathrobe. With soap in one hand, and potty, hairpins,
panties, curlers and a wad of cotton in the other, I hurry out of the bathroom. The
next in line invariably calls me back to remove the gracefully curved but unsightly
hairs that I've left in the sink.
Ten o'clock. Time to put up the blackout screen and say good-night. For the next
fifteen minutes, at least, the house is filled with the creaking of beds and the sigh of
broken springs, and then, provided our upstairs neighbors aren't having a marital spat
in bed, all is quiet.
Eleven-thirty. The bathroom door creaks. A narrow strip of light falls into the room.
Squeaking shoes, a large coat, even larger than the man inside it . . . Dussel is
returning from his nightly work in Mr. Kugler's office. I hear him shuffiing back and
forth for ten whole minutes, the rustle of paper (from the food he's tucking away in
his cupboard) and the bed being made up. Then the figure disappears again, and the
only sound is the occasional suspicious noise from the bathroom.
Approximately three o'clock. I have to get up to use the tin can under my bed, which,
to be on the safe side, has a rubber mat underneath in case of leaks. I always hold
my breath while I go, since it clatters into the can like a brook down a mountainside.
The potty is returned to its place, and the figure in the white nightgown (the one that
causes Margot to exclaim every evening, "Oh, that indecent nighty!") climbs back into
bed. A certain somebody lies awake for about fifteen minutes, listening to the sounds
of the night. In the first place, to hear whether there are any burglars downstairs, and
then to the various beds -- upstairs, next door and in my room -- to tell whether
the others are asleep or half awake. This is no fun, especially when it concerns a
member of the family named Dr. Dussel. First, there's the sound of a fish gasping for
air, and this is repeated nine or ten times. Then, the lips are moistened profusely.
This is alternated with little smacking sounds, followed by a long period of tossing and
turning and rearranging the pillows. After five minutes of perfect quiet, the same
sequence repeats itself three more times, after which he's presumably lulled himself
back to sleep for a while.
Sometimes the guns go off during the night, between one and four. I'm never aware of
it before it happens, but all of a sudden I find myself standing beside my bed, out of
sheer habit. Occasionally I'm dreaming so deeply (of irregular French verbs or a
quarrel upstairs) that I realize only when my dream is over that the shooting has
stopped and that I've remained quietly in my room. But usually I wake up. Then I
grab a pillow and a handkerchief, throw on my robe and slippers and dash next door
to Father, just the way Margot described in this birthday poem:
When shots rino out in the dark of night,
The door creaks open and into sight
Come a hanky, a pillow, a figure in white. . .
Once I've reached the big bed, the worst is over, except when the shooting is extra
loud.
Six forty-five. Brrring . . . the alarm clock, which raises its shrill voice at any hour
of the day or night, whether you want it to or not. Creak. . . wham. . . Mrs. van D.
turns it off. Screak . . . Mr. van D. gets up, puts on the water and races to the
bathroom.
Seven-fifteen. The door creaks again. Dussel can go to the bathroom. Alone at last, I
remove the blackout screen . . . and a new day begins in the Annex.
Yours, Anne
THURSDAY, AUGUST 5, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
Today let's talk about the lunch break.
It's twelve-thirty. The whole gang breathes a sigh of relief: Mr. van Maaren, the man
with the shady past, and
Mr. de Kok have gone home for lunch.
Upstairs you can hear the thud of the vacuum cleaner on Mrs. van D.'s beautiful and
only rug. Margot tucks a few books under her arm and heads for the class for "slow
learners," which is what Dussel seems to be. Pim goes and sits in a corner with his
constant companion, Dickens, in hopes of finding a bit of peace and quiet. Mother
hastens upstairs to help the busy little housewife, and I tidy up both the bathroom and
myself at the same time.
Twelve forty-five. One by one they trickle in: first Mr.
Gies and then either Mr. Kleiman or Mr. Kugler, followed by Bep and sometimes even
Miep.
One. Clustered around the radio, they all listen raptly to the BBC. This is the only
time the members of the Annex family don't interrupt each other, since even Mr. van
Daan can't argue with the speaker.
One-fifteen. Food distribution. Everyone from downstairs gets a cup of soup, plus
dessert, if there happens to be any. A contented Mr. Gies sits on the divan or leans
against the desk with his newspaper, cup and usually the cat at his side. If one of the
three is missing, he doesn't hesitate to let his protest be heard. Mr. Kleiman relates
the latest news from town, and he's an excellent source. Mr. Kugler hurries up the
stairs, gives a short but solid knock on the door and comes in either wringing his
hands or rubbing them in glee, depending on whether he's quiet and in a bad mood or
talkative and in a good mood.
One forty-five. Everyone rises from the table and goes about their business. Margot
and Mother do the dishes, Mr. and Mrs. van D. head for the divan, Peter for the attic,
Father for his divan, Dussel too, and Anne does her homework.
What comes next is the quietest hour of the day; when they're all asleep, there are
no disturbances. To judge by his face, Dussel is dreaming of food. But I don't look at
him long, because the time whizzes by and before you know it, it'll be 4 P.M. and the
pedantic Dr. Dussel will be standing with the clock in his hand because I'm one minute
,late clearing off the table.
Yours, Anne
SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
A few weeks ago I started writing a story, something I made up from beginning to
end, and I've enjoyed it so much that the products of my pen are piling up.
Yours, Anne
MONDAY, AUGUST 9, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
We now continue with a typical day in the Annex. Since we've already had lunch, it's
time to describe dinner.
Mr. van Daan. Is served first, and takes a generous portion of whatever he likes.
Usually joins in the conversation, never fails to give his opinion. Once he's spoken, his
word is final. If anyone dares to suggest otherwise, Mr. van D. can put up a good
fight. Oh, he can hiss like a cat. . . but I'd rather he didn't. Once you've seen it, you
never want to see it again. His opinion is the best, he knows the most about
everything. Granted, the man has a good head on his shoulders, but it's swelled to no
small degree.
Madame. Actually, the best thing would be to say nothing. Some days, especially when
a foul mood is on the way, her face is hard to read. If you analyze the discussions,
you realize she's not the subject, but the guilty party! A fact everyone prefers to
ignore. Even so, you could call her the instigator. Stirring up trouble, now that's what
Mrs. van Daan calls fun. Stirring up trouble between Mrs. Frank and Anne. Margot and
Mr. Frank aren t qwte as easy.
But let's return to the table. Mrs. van D. may think she doesn't always get enough,
but that's not the case. The choicest potatoes, the tastiest morsel, the tenderest bit of
whatever there is, that's Madame's motto. The others can all have their turn, as long
as I get the best. (Exactly what she accuses Anne Frank of doing.) Her second
watchword is: keep talking. As long as somebody's listening, it doesn't seem to occur
to her to wonder whether they're interested. She must think that whatever Mrs. van
Daan says will interest everyone.
Smile coquettishly, pretend you know everything, offer everyone a piece of advice and
mother them -- that's sure to make a good impression. But if you take a better look,
the good impression fades. One, she's hardworking; two, cheerful; three, coquettish --
and sometimes a cute face. That's Petronella van Daan.
The third diner. Says very little. Young Mr. van Daan is usually quiet and hardly
makes his presence known. As far as his appetite is concerned, he's a Danaldean
vessel that never gets full. Even after the most substantial meal, he can look you
calmly in the eye and claim he could have eaten twice as much.
Number four -- Margot. Eats like a bird and doesn't talk at all. She eats only
vegetables and fruit. "Spoiled," in the opinion of the van Daans. "Too little exercise
and fresh air," in ours.
Beside her -- Mama. Has a hearty appetite, does her share of the talking. No one
has the impression, as they do with Mrs. van Daan, that this is a housewife. What's
the difference between the two? Well, Mrs. van D. does the cooking and Mother does
the dishes and polishes the furniture.
Numbers six and seven. I won't say much about Father and me. The former is the
most modest person at the table. He always looks to see whether the others have
been served first. He needs nothing for himself; the best things are for the children.
He's goodness personified. Seated next to him is the Annex's little bundle of nerves.
Dussel. Help yourself, keep your eyes on the food, eat and don't talk. And if you have
to say something, then for goodness' sake talk about food. That doesn't lead to
quarrels, just to bragging. He consumes enormous portions, and "no" is not part of his
vocabulary, whether the food is good or bad.
Pants that come up to his chest, a red jacket, black patent-leather slippers and
horn-rimmed glasses -- that's how he looks when he's at work at the little table,
always studying and never progressing. This is interrupted only by his afternoon nap,
food and -- his favorite spot -- the bathroom. Three, four or five times a day
there's bound to be someone waiting outside the bathroom door, hopping impatiently
from one foot to another, trying to hold it in and barely managing. Does Dussel care?
Not a whit. From seven-fifteen to seven-thirty, from twelve-thirty to one, from two
to two-fifteen, from four to four-fifteen, from six to six-fifteen, from eleven-thirty
to twelve. You can set your watch by them; these are the times for his "regular
sessions." He never deviates or lets himself be swayed by the voices outside the door,
begging him to open up before a disaster occurs.
Number nine is not part of our Annex family, although she does share our house and
table. Hep has a healthy appetite. She cleans her plate and isn't choosy. Hep's easy to
please and that pleases us. She can be characterized as follows: cheerful,
good-humored, kind and willing.
TUESDAY, AUGUST 10, 1943
Dearest Kitty, .
A new idea: during meals I talk more to myself than to the others, which has two
advantages. First, they're glad they don't have to listen to my continuous chatter, and
second, I don't have to get annoyed by their opinions. I don't think my opinions are
stupid but other people do, so it's better to keep them to myself. I apply the same
tactic when I have to eat something I loathe. I put the dish in front of me, pretend
it's delicious, avoid looking at it as much as possible, and it's gone before I've had
time to realize what it is. When I get up in the morning, another very disagreeable
moment, I leap out of bed, think to myself, "You'll be slipping back under the covers
soon," walk to the window, take down the blackout screen, sniff at the crack until I
feel a bit of fresh air, and I'm awake. I strip the bed as fast as I can so I won't be
tempted to get back in. Do you know what Mother calls this sort of thing? The art of
living. Isn't that a funny expression?
We've all been a little confused this past week because our dearly beloved
Westertoren bells have been carted off to be melted down for the war, so we have no
idea of the exact time, either night or day. I still have hopes that they'll come up with
a substitute, made of tin or copper or some such thing, to remind the neighborhood of
the clock.
Everywhere I go, upstairs or down, they all cast admiring glances at my feet, which
are adorned by a pair of exceptionally beautiful (for times like these!) shoes. Miep
managed to snap them up for 27.50 guilders. Burgundy-colored suede and leather with
medium-sized high heels. I feel as if I were on stilts, and look even taller than I
already am.
Yesterday was my unlucky day. I pricked my right thumb with the blunt end of a big
needle. As a result, Margot had to peel potatoes for me (take the good with the bad),
and writing was awkward. Then I bumped into the cupboard door so hard it nearly
knocked me over, and was scolded for making such a racket. They wouldn't let me run
water to bathe my forehead, so now I'm walking around with a giant lump over my
right eye. To make matters worse, the little toe on my right foot got stuck in the
vacuum cleaner. It bled and hurt, but my other ailments were already causing me so
much trouble that I let this one slide, which was stupid of me, because now I'm
walking around with an infected toe. What with the salve, the gauze and the tape, I
can't get my heavenly new shoe on my foot.
Dussel has put us in danger for the umpteenth time. He actually had Miep bring him a
book, an anti-Mussolini tirade, which has been banned. On the way here she was
knocked down by an SS motorcycle. She lost her head and shouted "You brutes!" and
went on her way. I don't dare think what would have happened if she'd been taken
down to headquarters.
Yours, Anne
A Daily Chore in Our Little Community: Peeling Potatoes!
One person goes to get some newspapers; another, the knives (keeping the best for
himself, of course); the third, the potatoes; and the fourth, the water.
Mr. Dussel begins. He may not always peel them very well, but he does peel nonstop,
glancing left and right to see if everyone is doing it the way he does. No, they're not!
"Look, Anne, I am taking peeler in my hand like so and going from the top to bottom!
Nein, not so . . . but so!"
"I think my way is easier, Mr. Dussel," I say tentatively.
"But this is best way, Anne. This you can take from me. Of course, it is no matter,
you do the way you want."
We go on peeling. I glance at Dussel out of the corner of my eye. Lost in thought, he
shakes his head (over me, no doubt), but says no more.
I keep on peeling. Then I look at Father, on the other side of me. To Father, peeling
potatoes is not a chore, but precision work. When he reads, he has a deep wrinkle in
the back of his head. But when he's preparing potatoes, beans or vegetables, he seems
to be totally absorbed in his task. He puts on his potato-peeling face, and when it's
set in that particular way, it would be impossible for him to turn out anything less
than a perfectly peeled potato.
I keep on working. I glance up for a second, but that's all the time I need. Mrs. van
D. is trying to attract Dussel's attention. She starts by looking in his direction, but
Dussel pretends not to notice. She winks, but Dussel goes on peeling. She laughs, but
Dussel still doesn't look up. Then Mother laughs too, but Dussel pays them no mind.
Having failed to achieve her goal, Mrs. van D. is obliged to change tactics. There's a
brief silence. Then she says, "Putti, why don't you put on an apron? Otherwise, I'll
have to spend all day tomorrow trying to get the spots out of your suit!"
"I'm not getting it dirty."
Another brief silence. "Putti, why don't you sit down?'
"I'm fine this way. I like standing up!"
Silence.
"Putti, look out, du spritzt schon!".* [*Now you're splashing!]
"I know, Mommy, but I'm being careful."
Mrs. van D. casts about for another topic. "Tell me, Putti, why aren't the British
carrying out any bombing raids today?"
"Because the weather's bad, Kerli!"
"But yesterday it was such nice weather and they weren't flying then either."
"Let's drop the subject."
"Why? Can't a person talk about that or offer an opinion?'
"Well, why in the world not?"
"Oh, be quiet, Mammichen!"* [*Mommy]
"Mr. Frank always answers his wife."
Mr. van D. is trying to control himself. This remark always rubs him the wrong way,
but Mrs. van D.'s not one to quit: "Oh, there's never going to be an invasion!"
Mr. van D. turns white, and when she notices it, Mrs. van D. turns red, but she's not
about to be deterred: "The British aren't doing a thing!"
The bomb bursts. "And now shut up, Donnerwetter noch mal!* [*For crying out
loud!"]
Mother can barely stifle a laugh, and I stare straight ahead.
Scenes like these are repeated almost daily, unless they've just had a terrible fight. In
that case, neither Mr. nor Mrs. van D. says a word.
It's time for me to get some more potatoes. I go up to the attic, where Peter is busy
picking fleas from the cat.
He looks up, the cat notices it, and whoosh. . . he's gone. Out the window and into
the rain gutter.
Peter swears; I laugh and slip out of the room.
Freedom in the Annex
Five-thirty. Bep's arrival signals the beginning of our nightly freedom. Things get
going right away. I go upstairs with Bep, who usually has her dessert before the rest
of us. The moment she sits down, Mrs. van D. begins stating her wishes. Her list
usually starts with "Oh, by the way, Bep, something else I'd like. . ." Bep winks at
me. Mrs. van D. doesn't miss a chance to make her wishes known to whoever comes
upstairs. It must be one of the reasons none of them like to go up there.
Five forty-five. Bep leaves. I go down two floors to have a look around: first to the
kitchen, then to the private office and then to the coal bin to open the cat door for
Mouschi.
After a long tour of inspection, I wind up in Mr. Kugler's office. Mr. van Daan is
combing all the drawers and files for today's mail. Peter picks up Boche and the
warehouse key; Pim lugs the typewriters upstairs; Margot looks around for a quiet
place to do her office work; Mrs. van D. puts a kettle of water on the stove; Mother
comes down the stairs with a pan of potatoes; we all know our jobs.
Soon Peter comes back from the warehouse. The first question they ask him is
whether he's remembered the bread. No, he hasn't. He crouches before the door to the
front office to make himself as small as possible and crawls on his hands and knees to
the steel cabinet, takes out the bread and starts to leave. At any rate, that's what he
intends to do, but before he knows what's happened, Mouschi has jumped over him and
gone to sit under the desk.
Peter looks all around him. Aha, there's the cat! He crawls back into the office and
grabs the cat by the tail. Mouschi hisses, Peter sighs. What has he accomplished?
Mouschi's now sitting by the window licking herself, very pleased at having escaped
Peter's clutches. Peter has no choice but to lure her with a piece of bread. Mouschi
takes the bait, follows him out, and the door closes.
I watch the entire scene through a crack in the door.
Mr. van Daan is angry and slams the door. Margot and I exchange looks and think the
same thing: he must have worked himself into a rage again because of some blunder
on Mr. Kugler's part, and he's forgotten all about the Keg Company next door.
Another step is heard in the hallway. Dussel comes in, goes toward the window with
an air of propriety, sniffs. . . coughs, sneezes and clears his throat. He's out of luck
-- it was pepper. He continues on to the front office. The curtains are open, which
means he can't get at his writing paper. He disappears with a scowl.
Margot and I exchange another glance. "One less page for his sweetheart tomorrow," I
hear her say. I nod in agreement.
An elephant's tread is heard on the stairway. It's Dussel, seeking comfort in his
favorite spot.
We continue working. Knock, knock, knock. . . Three taps means dinnertime!
MONDAY, AUGUST 23, 1943
Wenn Die Uhr Halb Neune Schlaat . . .* [* When the clock strikes half past eight.]
Margot and Mother are nervous. "Shh . . . Father. Be quiet, Otto. Shh . . . Pim! It's
eight-thirty.
Come here, you can't run the water anymore. Walk softly!" A sample of what's said to
Father in the bathroom. At the stroke of half past eight, he has to be in the living
room. No running water, no flushing toilet, no walking around, no noise whatsoever. As
long as the office staff hasn't arrived, sounds travel more easily to the warehouse.
The door opens upstairs at eight-twenty, and this is followed by three gentle taps on
the floor. . . Anne's hot cereal. I clamber up the stairs to get my doggie dish.
Back downstairs, everything has to be done quickly, quickly: I comb my hair, put away
the potty, shove the bed back in place. Quiet! The clock is striking eight-thirty! Mrs.
van D. changes shoes and shuffles through the room in her slippers; Mr. van D. too
-- a veritable Charlie Chaplin. All is quiet.
The ideal family scene has now reached its high point. I want to read or study and
Margot does too. Father and Mother ditto. Father is sitting (with Dickens and the
dictionary, of course) on the edge of the sagging, squeaky bed, which doesn't even
have a decent mattress. Two bolsters can be piled on top of each other. "I don't need
these," he thinks. "I can manage without them!"
Once he starts reading, he doesn't look up. He laughs now and then and tries to get
Mother to read a story.
"I don't have the time right now!"
He looks disappointed, but then continues to read.
A little while later, when he comes across another good passage, he tries again: "You
have to read this, Mother!"
Mother sits on the folding bed, either reading, sewing, knitting or studying, whichever
is next on her list. An idea suddenly occurs to her, and she quickly says, so as not to
forget, "Anne, remember to . . . Margot, jot this down. . . "
After a while it's quiet again. Margot slams her book shut; Father knits his forehead,
his eyebrows forming a funny curve and his wrinkle of concentration reappearing I at
the back of his head, and he buries himself in his book 1 again; Mother starts chatting
with Margot; and I get curious and listen too. Pim is drawn into the conversation . . .
Nine o'clock. Breakfast!
FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 10, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
Every time I write to you, something special has happened, usually unpleasant rather
than pleasant. This time, however, something wonderful is going on.
On Wednesday, September 8, we were listening to the seven o'clock news when we
heard an announcement: "Here is some of the best news of the war so far: Italy has
capitulated." Italy has unconditionally surrendered! The Dutch broadcast from England
began at eight-fifteen with the news: "Listeners, an hour and fifteen minutes ago, just
as I finished writing my daily report, we received the wonderful news of Italy's
capitulation. I tell you, I never tossed my notes into the wastepaper basket with more
delight than I did today!"
"God Save the King," the American national anthem and the Russian' 'Internationale"
were played. As always, the Dutch program was uplifting without being too optimistic.
The British have landed in Naples. Northern Italy is occupied by the Germans. The
truce was signed on Friday, September 3, the day the British landed in Italy. The
Germans are ranting and raving in all the newspapers at the treachery of Badoglio and
the Italian king.
Still, there's bad news as well. It's about Mr. Kleiman. As you know, we all like him
very much. He's unfailingly cheerful and amazingly brave, despite the fact that he's
always sick and in pain and can't eat much or do a lot of walking. "When Mr. Kleiman
enters a room, the sun begins to shine," Mother said recently, and she's absolutely
right.
Now it seems he has to go to the hospital for a very difficult operation on his
stomach, and will have to stay there for at least four weeks. You should have seen
him when he told us good-bye. He acted so normally, as though he were just off to
do an errand.
Yours, Anne
THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 16, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
Relationships here in the Annex are getting worse all the time. We don't dare open
our mouths at mealtime (except to slip in a bite of food), because no matter what we
say, someone is bound to resent it or take it the wrong way. Mr. Voskuijl occasionally
comes to visit us. Unfortunately, he's not doing very well. He isn't making it any
easier for his family, because his attitude seems to be: what do I care, I'm going to
die anyway! When I think how touchy everyone is here, I can just imagine what it
must be like at the Voskuijls'.
I've been taking valerian every day to fight the anxiety and depression, but it doesn't
stop me from being even more miserable the next day. A good hearty laugh would
help better than ten valerian drops, but we've almost forgotten how to laugh.
Sometimes I'm afraid my face is going to sag with all this sorrow and that my mouth
is going to permanently droop at the corners. The others aren't doing any better.
Everyone here is dreading the great terror known as winter.
Another fact that doesn't exactly brighten up our days is that Mr. van Maaren, the
man who works in the warehouse, is getting suspicious about the Annex. A person
with any brains must have noticed by now that Miep sometimes says she's going to
the lab, Bep to the file room and Mr. Kleiman to the Opekta supplies, while Mr.
Kugler claims the Annex doesn't belong to this building at all, but to the one next
door.
We wouldn't care what Mr. van Maaren thought of the situation except that he's
known to be unreliable and to possess a high degree of curiosity. He's not one who
can be put off with a flimsy excuse.
One day Mr. Kugler wanted to be extra cautious, so at twenty past twelve he put on
his coat and went to the drugstore around the corner. Less than five minutes later he
was back, and he sneaked up the stairs like a thief to visit us. At one-fifteen he
started to leave, but Bep met him on the landing and warned him that van Maaren was
in the office. Mr. Kugler did an about-face and stayed with us until one-thirty. Then
he took off his shoes and went in his stockinged feet (despite his cold) to the front
attic and down the other stairway, taking one step at a time to avoid the creaks. It
took him fifteen minutes to negotiate the stairs, but he wound up safely in the office
after having entered from the outside.
In the meantime, Bep had gotten rid of van Maaren and come to get Mr. Kugler from
the Annex. But he'd already left and at that moment was still tiptoeing down the
stairs. What must the passersby have thought when they saw the manager putting on
his shoes outside? Hey, you there, in the socks!
Yours, Anne
WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 29, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
It's Mrs. van Daan's birthday. Other than one ration stamp each for cheese, meat and
bread, all she received from us was a jar of jam. Her husband, Dussel and the office
staff gave her nothing but flowers and also food. Such are the times we live in!
Bep had a nervous fit last week because she had so many errands to do. Ten times a
day people were sending her out for something, each time insisting she go right away
or go again or that she'd done it all wrong. And when you think that she has her
regular office work to do, that Mr. Kleiman is sick, that Miep is home with a cold and
that Bep herself has a sprained ankle, boyfriend troubles and a grouchy father, it's no
wonder she's at the end of her tether. We comforted her and told her that if she'd put
her foot down once or twice and say she didn't have the time, the shopping lists
would shrink of their own accord.
Saturday there was a big drama, the likes of which have never been seen here before.
It started with a discussion of van Maaren and ended in a general argument and tears.
Dussel complained to Mother that he was being treated like a leper, that no one was
friendly to him and that, after all, he hadn't done anything to deserve it. This was
followed by a lot of sweet talk, which luckily Mother didn't fall for this time. She told
him we were disappointed in him and that, on more than one occasion, he'd been a
source of great annoyance. Dussel promised her the moon, but, as usual, we haven't
seen so much as a beam.
There's trouble brewing with the van Daans, I can tell! Father's furious because
they're cheating us: they've been holding back meat and other things. Oh, what kind of
bombshell is about to burst now? If only I weren't so involved in all these skirmishes!
If only I could leave here! They're driving us crazy!
Yours, Anne
SUNDAY, OCTOBER 17, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
Mr. Kleiman is back, thank goodness! He looks a bit pale, and yet he cheerfully set
off to sell some clothes for Mr. van Daan. The disagreeable fact is that Mr. van Daan
has run out of money. He lost his last hundred guilders in the warehouse, which is
still creating trouble for us: the men are wondering how a hundred guilders could wind
up in the warehouse on a Monday morning. Suspicion abounds. Meanwhile, the hundred
guilders have been stolen. Who's the thief?
But I was talking about the money shortage. Mrs. van D. has scads of dresses, coats
and shoes, none of which she feels she can do without. Mr. van D.'s suit is difficult to
sell, and Peter's bike was put on the block, but is back again, since nobody wanted it.
But the story doesn't end there. You see, Mrs. van D. is going to have to part with
her fur coat. In her opinion, the firm should pay for our upkeep, but that's ridiculous.
They just had a flaming row about it and have entered the "oh, my sweet Putti" and
"darling Kerli" stage of reconciliation.
My mind boggles at the profanity this honorable house has had to endure in the past
month. Father walks around with his lips pressed together, and whenever he hears his
name, he looks up in alarm, as ifhe's afraid he'll be called upon to resolve another
delicate problem. Mother's so wrought up her cheeks are blotched with red, Margot
complains of headaches, Dussel can't sleep, Mrs. van D. frets and fumes all day long,
and I've gone completely round the bend. To tell you the truth, I sometimes forget
who we're at odds with and who we're not. The only way to take my mind off it is to
study, and I've been doing a lot of that lately.
Yours, Anne
FRIDAY, OCTOBER 29,1943
My dearest Kitty,
Mr. Kleiman is out again; his stomach won't give him a moment's peace. He doesn't
even know whether it's stopped bleeding. He came to tell us he wasn't feeling well
and was going home, and for the first time he seemed really down.
Mr. and Mrs. van D. have had more raging battles. The reason is simple: they're
broke. They wanted to sell an overcoat and a suit of Mr. van D. 's, but were unable
to find any buyers. His prices were way too high.
Some time ago Mr. Kleiman was talking about a furrier he knows. This gave Mr. van
D. the idea of selling his wife's fur coat. It's made of rabbit skin, and she's had it for
seventeen years. Mrs. van D. got 325 guilders for it, an enormous amount. She wanted
to keep the money herself to buy new clothes after the war, and it took some doing
before Mr. van D. could make her understand that it was desperately needed to cover
household expenses.
You can't imagine the screaming, shouting, stamping of feet and swearing that went on.
It was terrifying. My family stood holding its breath at the bottom of the stairs, in
case it might be necessary to drag them apart. All the bickering, tears and nervous
tension have become such a stress and strain that I fall into my bed at night crying
and thanking my lucky stars that I have half an hour to myself.
I'm doing fine, except I've got no appetite. I keep hearing: "Goodness, you look
awful!" I must admit they're doing their best to keep me in condition: they're plying
me with dextrose, cod-liver oil, brewer's yeast and calcium. My nerves often get the
better of me, especially on Sundays; that's when I really feel miserable. The
atmosphere is stifling, sluggish, leaden. Outside, you don't hear a single bird, and a
deathly, oppressive silence hangs over the house and clings to me as if it were going
to drag me into the deepest regions of the underworld. At times like these, Father,
Mother and Margot don't matter to me in the least. I wander from room to room,
climb up and down the stairs and feel like a songbird whose wings have been ripped
off and who keeps hurling itself against the bars of its dark cage. "Let me out, where
there's fresh air and laughter!" a voice within me cries. I don't even bother to reply
anymore, but lie down on the divan. Sleep makes the silence and the terrible fear go
by more quickly, helps pass the time, since it's impossible to kill it.
Yours, Anne
WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 3, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
To take our minds off matters as well as to develop them, Father ordered a catalog
from a correspondence school. Margot pored through the thick brochure three times
without finding anything to her liking and within her budget. Father was easier to
satisfy and decided to write and ask for a trial lesson in "Elementary Latin." No
sooner said than done. The lesson arrived, Margot set to work enthusiastically and
decided to take the course, despite the expense. It's much too hard for me, though I'd
really like to learn Latin.
To give me a new project as well, Father asked Mr. Kleiman for a children's Bible so
I could finally learn something about the New Testament.
"Are you planning to give Anne a Bible for Hanukkah?" Margot asked, somewhat
perturbed.
"Yes. . . Well, maybe St. Nicholas Day would be a better occasion," Father replied.
Jesus and Hanukkah don't exactly go together.
Since the vacuum cleaner's broken, I have to take an old brush to the rug every night.
The window's closed, the light's on, the stove's burning, and there I am brushing away
at the rug. "That's sure to be a problem," I thought to myself the first time. "There're
bound to be complaints." I was right: Mother got a headache from the thick clouds of
dust whirling around the room, Margot's new Latin dictionary was caked with dirt, and
rim grumbled that the floor didn't look any different anyway. Small thanks for my
pains.
We've decided that from now on the stove is going to be lit at seven-thirty on
Sunday mornings instead of five-thirty. I think it's risky. What will the neighbors
think of our smoking chimney?
It's the same with the curtains. Ever since we first went into hiding, they've been
tacked firmly to the windows. Sometimes one of the ladies or gentlemen can't resist
the urge to peek outside. The result: a storm of reproaches. The response: "Oh,
nobody will notice." That's how every act of carelessness begins and ends. No one
will notice, no one will hear, no one will pay the least bit of attention. Easy to say,
but is it true?
At the moment, the tempestuous quarrels have subsided; only Dussel and the van
Daans are still at loggerheads. When Dussel is talking about Mrs. van D., he invariably
calls her' 'that old bat" or "that stupid hag," and conversely, Mrs. van D. refers to our
ever so learned gentleman as an "old maid" or a "touchy neurotic spinster, etc.
The pot calling the kettle black!
Yours, Anne
MONDAY EVENING, NOVEMBER 8,1943
Dearest Kitty,
If you were to read all my letters in one sitting, you'd be struck by the fact that they
were written in a variety of moods. It annoys me to be so dependent on the moods
here in the Annex, but I'm not the only one: we're all subject to them. If I'm
engrossed in a book, I have to rearrange my thoughts before I can mingle with other
people, because otherwise they might think I was strange. As you can see, I'm
currently in the middle of a depression. I couldn't really tell you what set it off, but I
think it stems from my cowardice, which confronts me at every turn. This evening,
when Bep was still here, the doorbell rang long and loud. I instantly turned white, my
stomach churned, and my heart beat wildly -- and all because I was afraid.
At night in bed I see myself alone in a dungeon, without Father and Mother. Or I'm
roaming the streets, or the Annex is on fire, or they come in the middle of the night
to take us away and I crawl under my bed in desperation. I see everything as if it
were actually taking place. And to think it might all happen soon!
Miep often says she envies us because we have such peace and quiet here. That may
be true, but she's obviously not thinking about our fear.
I simply can't imagine the world will ever be normal again for us. I do talk about
"after the war," but it's as if I were talking about a castle in the air, something that
can Ii never come true.
I see the ei ght of us in the Annex as if we were a patch of blue sky surrounded by
menacing black clouds. The perfectly round spot on which we're standing is still safe,
but the clouds are moving in on us, and the ring between us and the approaching
danger is being pulled tighter and tighter. We're surrounded by darkness and danger,
and in our desperate search for a way out we keep bumping into each other. We look
at the fighting down below and the peace and beauty up above. In the meantime,
we've been cut off by the dark mass of clouds, so that we can go neither up nor
down. It looms before us like an impenetrable wall, trying to crush us, but not yet
able to. I can only cry out and implore, "Oh, ring, ring, open wide and let us out!"
Yours, Anne
THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 11, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
I have a good title for this chapter:
Ode to My Fountain Pen
In Memoriam
My fountain pen was always one of my most prized possessions; I valued it highly,
especially because it had a thick nib, and I can only write neatly with thick nibs. It
has led a long and interesting fountain-pen life, which I will summarize below.
When I was nine, my fountain pen (packed in cotton) arrived as a "sample of no
commercial value" all the way from Aachen, where my grandmother (the kindly donor)
used to live. I lay in bed with the flu, while the February winds howled around the
apartment house. This splendid fountain pen came in a red leather case, and I showed
it to my girlfriends the first chance I got. Me, Anne Frank, the proud owner of a
fountain pen.
When I was ten, I was allowed to take the pen to school, and to my surprise, the
teacher even let me write with it. When I was eleven, however, my treasure had to
be tucked away again, because my sixth-grade teacher allowed us to use only school
pens and inkpots. When I was twelve, I started at the Jewish Lyceum and my fountain
pen was given a new case in honor of the occasion. Not only did it have room for a
pencil, it also had a zipper, which was much more impressive. When I was thirteen,
the fountain pen went with me to the Annex, and together we've raced through
countless diaries and compositions. I'd turned fourteen and my fountain pen was
enjoying the last year of its life with me when . . .
It was just after five on Friday afternoon. I came out of my room and was about to
sit down at the table to write when I was roughly pushed to one side to make room
for Margot and Father, who wanted to practice their Latin. The fountain pen remained
unused on the table, while its owner, sighing, was forced to make do with a very tiny
corner of the table, where she began rubbing beans. That's how we remove mold from
the beans and restore them to their original state. At a quarter to six I swept the
floor, dumped the dirt into a news paper, along with the rotten beans, and tossed it
into the stove. A giant flame shot up, and I thought it was wonderful that the stove,
which had been gasping its last breath, had made such a miraculous recovery.
All was quiet again. The Latin students had left, and I sat down at the table to pick
up where I'd left off. But no matter where I looked, my fountain pen was nowhere in
sight. I took another look. Margot looked, Mother looked, Father looked, Dussel looked.
But it had vanished.
"Maybe it fell in the stove, along with the beans!" Margot suggested.
"No, it couldn't have!" I replied.
But that evening, when my fountain pen still hadn't turned up, we all assumed it had
been burned, especially because celluloid is highly inflammable. Our darkest fears were
confirmed the next day when Father went to empty the stove and discovered the clip,
used to fasten it to a pocket, among the ashes. Not a trace of the gold nib was left.
"It must have melted into stone," Father conjectured.
I'm left with one consolation, small though it may be: my fountain pen was cremated,
just as I would like to be someday!
Yours, Anne
WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 17, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
Recent events have the house rocking on its foundations. Owing to an outbreak of
diphtheria at Bep's, she won't be allowed to come in contact with us for six weeks.
Without her, the cooking and shopping will be very difficult, not to mention how much
we'll miss her company. Mr. Kleiman is still in bed and has eaten nothing but gruel
for three weeks. Mr. Kugler is up to his neck in work.
Margot sends her Latin lessons to a teacher, who corrects and then returns them.
She's registered under Bep's name. The teacher's very nice, and witty too. I bet he's
glad to have such a smart student.
Dussel is in a turmoil and we don't know why. It all began with Dussel's saying
nothing when he was upstairs; he didn't exchange so much as a word with either Mr.
or Mrs. van Daan. We all noticed it. This went on for a few days, and then Mother
took the opportunity to warn him about Mrs. van D., who could make life miserable
for him. Dussel said Mr. van Daan had started the silent treatment and he had no
intention of breaking it. I should explain that yesterday was November 16, the first
anniversary of his living in the Annex. Mother received a plant in honor of the
occasion, but Mrs. van Daan, who had alluded to the date for weeks and made no
bones about the fact that she thought Dussel should treat us to dinner, received
nothing. Instead of making use of the opportunity to thank us -- for the first time
-- for unselfishly taking him in, he didn't utter a word. And on the morning of the
sixteenth, when I asked him whether I should offer him my congratulations or my
condolences, he replied that either one would do. Mother, having cast herself in the
role of peacemaker, made no headway whatsoever, and the situation finally ended in a
draw.
I can say without exaggeration that Dussel has definitely got a screw loose. We often
laugh to ourselves because he has no memory, no fixed opinions and no common
sense. He's amused us more than once by trying to pass on the news he's just heard,
since the message invariably gets garbled in transmission. Furthermore, he answers
every reproach or accusation with a load of fine 1\ promises, which he never manages
to keep.
"Der Mann hat einen grossen Geist
Una ist so klein van Taten!"*
[*A well-known expression:
"The spirit of the man is great,
How puny are his deeds."
Yours, Anne
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 27, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
Last night, just as I was falling asleep, Hanneli suddenly appeared before me.
I saw her there, dressed in rags, her face thin and worn. She looked at me with such
sadness and reproach in her enormous eyes that I could read the message in them:
"Oh, Anne, why have you deserted me? Help me, help me, rescue me from this hell!"
And I can't help her. I can only stand by and watch while other people suffer and die.
All I can do is pray to God to bring her back to us. I saw Hanneli, and no one else,
and I understood why. I misjudged her, wasn't mature enough to understand how
difficult it was for her. She was devoted to her girlfriend, and it must have seemed as
though I were trying to take her away. The poor thing, she must have felt awful! I
know, because I recognize the feeling in myself! I had an occasional flash of
understanding, but then got selfishly wrapped up again in my own problems and
pleasures.
It was mean of me to treat her that way, and now she was looking at me, oh so
helplessly, with her pale face and beseeching eyes. If only I could help her! Dear God,
I have everything I could wish for, while fate has her in its deadly clutches. She was
as devout as I am, maybe even more so, and she too wanted to do what was right.
But then why have I been chosen to live, while she's probably going to die? What's
the difference between us? Why are we now so far apart?
To be honest, I hadn't thought of her for months -- no, for at least a year. I hadn't
forgotten her entirely, and yet it wasn't until I saw her before me that I thought of all
her suffering.
Oh, Hanneli, I hope that if you live to the end of the war and return to us, I'll be able
to take you in and make up for the wrong I've done you.
But even if I were ever in a position to help, she wouldn't need it more than she does
now. I wonder if she ever thinks of me, and what she's feeling?
Merciful God, comfort her, so that at least she won't be alone. Oh, if only You could
tell her I'm thinking of her with compassion and love, it might help her go on.
I've got to stop dwelling on this. It won't get me anywhere. I keep seeing her
enormous eyes, and they haunt me. Does Hanneli really and truly believe in God, or
has religion merely been foisted upon her? I don't even know that. I never took the
trouble to ask.
Hanneli, Hanneli, if only I could take you away, if only I could share everything I have
with you. It's too late. I can't help, or undo the wrong I've done. But I'll never forget
her again and I'll always pray for her!
Yours, Anne
MONDAY, DECEMBER 6, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
The closer it got to St. Nicholas Day, the more we all thought back to last year's
festively decorated basket.
More than anyone, I thought it would be terrible to skip a celebration this year. After
long deliberation, I finally came up with an idea, something funny. I consulted rim, and
a week ago we set to work writing a verse for each person.
Sunday evening at a quarter to eight we trooped upstairs carrying the big laundry
basket, which had been decorated with cutouts and bows made of pink and blue carbon
paper. On top was a large piece of brown wrapping paper with a note attached.
Everyone was rather amazed at the sheer size of the gift. I removed the note and
read it aloud:
"Once again St. Nicholas Day
Has even come to our hideaway;
It won't be quite as Jun, I fear,
As the happy day we had last year.
Then we were hopeful, no reason to doubt
That optimism would win the bout,
And by the time this year came round,
We'd all be free, and s* and sound.
Still, let's not Jorget it's St. Nicholas Day,
Though we've nothing left to give away.
We'll have to find something else to do:
So everyone please look in their shoe!"
As each person took their own shoe out of the basket, there was a roar of laughter.
Inside each shoe was a little wrapped package addressed to its owner.
Yours, Anne
Dearest Kitty,
A bad case of flu has prevented me from writing to you until today. Being sick here
is dreadful. With every cough, I had to duck under the blanket -- once, twice, three
times -- and try to keep from coughing anymore.
Most of the time the tickle refused to go away, so I had to drink milk with honey,
sugar or cough drops. I get dizzy just thinking about all the cures I've been subjected
to: sweating out the fever, steam treatment, wet compresses, dry compresses, hot
drinks, swabbing my throat, lying still, heating pad, hot-water bottles, lemonade and,
every two hours, the thermometer. Will these remedies really make you better? The
worst part was when Mr. Dussel decided to play doctor and lay his pomaded head on
my bare chest to listen to the sounds. Not only did his hair tickle, but I was
embarrassed, even though he went to school thirty years ago and does have some kind
of medical degree. Why should he lay his head on my heart? After all, he's not my
boyfriend! For that matter, he wouldn't be able to tell a healthy sound from an
unhealthy one.
He'd have to have his ears cleaned first, since he's becoming alarmingly hard of
hearing. But enough about my illness. I'm fit as a fiddle again. I've grown almost half
an inch and gained two pounds. I'm pale, but itching to get back to my books.
Ausnahmsweise* (the only word that will do here [* By way of exception]), we're all
getting on well together. No squabbles, though that probably won't last long. There
hasn't been such peace and quiet in this house for at least six months.
Bep is still in isolation, but any day now her sister will no longer be contagious.
For Christmas, we're getting extra cooking oil, candy and molasses. For Hanukkah, Mr.
Dussel gave Mrs. van Daan and Mother a beautiful cake, which he'd asked Miep to
bake. On top of all the work she has to do! Margot and I received a brooch made out
of a penny, all bright and shiny. I can't really describe it, but it's lovely.
I also have a Christmas present for Miep and Bep. For a whole month I've saved up
the sugar I put on my hot cereal, and Mr. Kleiman has used it to have fondant made.
The weather is drizzly and overcast, the stove stinks, and the food lies heavily on our
stomachs, producing a variety of rumbles.
The war is at an impasse, spirits are low.
Yours, Anne
FRIDAY, DECEMBER 24, 1943
Dear Kitty,
As I've written you many times before, moods have a tendency to affect us quite a
bit here, and in my case it's been getting worse lately. "Himmelhoch jauchzend, zu
Tode betru'bt"* [* A famous line from Goethe: "On top of the world, or in the depths
of despair."] certainly applies to me. I'm "on top of the world" when I think of how
fortunate we are and compare myself to other Jewish children, and "in the depths of
despair" when, for example, Mrs. Kleiman comes by and talks about Jopie's hockey
club, canoe trips, school plays and afternoon teas with friends.
I don't think I'm jealous of Jopie, but I long to have a really good time for once and
to laugh so hard it hurts.
We're stuck in this house like lepers, especially during winter and the Christmas and
New Year's holidays. Actually, I shouldn't even be writing this, since it makes me
seem so ungrateful, but I can't keep everything to myself, so I'll repeat what I said at
the beginning: "Paper is more patient than people."
Whenever someone comes in from outside, with the wind in their clothes and the cold
on their cheeks, I feel like burying my head under the blankets to keep from thinking,
"When will we be allowed to breathe fresh air again?" I can't do that -- on the
contrary, I have to hold my head up high and put a bold face on things, but the
thoughts keep coming anyway. Not just once, but over and over.
Believe me, if you've been shut up for a year and a half, it can get to be too much
for you sometimes. But feelings can't be ignored, no matter how unjust or ungrateful
they seem. I long to ride a bike, dance, whistle, look at the world, feel young and
know that I'm free, and yet I can't let it show. just imagine what would happen if all
eight of us were to feel sorry for ourselves or walk around with the discontent clearly
visible on our faces. Where would that get us? I sometimes wonder if anyone will
ever understand what I mean, if anyone will ever overlook my ingratitude and not
worry about whether or not I'm Jewish and merely see me as a teenager badly in
need of some good plain fun. I don't know, and I wouldn't be able to talk about it with
anyone, since I'm sure I'd start to cry. Crying can bring relief, as long as you don't
cry alone. Despite all my theories and efforts, I miss -- every day and every hour of
the day -- having a mother who understands me. That's why with everything I do
and write, I imagine the kind of mom I'd like to be to my children later on. The kind
of mom who doesn't take everything people say too seriously, but who does take me
seriously. I find it difficult to describe what I mean, but the word' 'mom" says it all.
Do you know what I've come up with? In order to give me the feeling of calling my
mother something that sounds like "Mom," I often call her" Momsy." Sometimes I
shorten it to "Moms"; an imperfect "Mom." I wish I could honor her by removing the
"s." It's a good thing she doesn't realize this, since it would only make her unhappy.
Well, that's enough of that. My writing has raised me somewhat from "the depths of
despair."
Yours, Anne
It's the day after Christmas, and I can't help thinking about Pim and the story he told
me this time last year. I didn't understand the meaning of his words then as well as I
do now. If only he'd bring it up again, I might be able to show him I understood what
he meant!
I think Pim told me because he, who knows the "intimate secrets" of so many others,
needed to express his own feelings for once; Pim never talks about himself, and I
don't think Margot has any inkling of what he's been through. Poor Pim, he can't fool
me into thinking he's forgotten that girl. He never will. It's made him very
accommodating, since he's not blind to Mother's faults. I hope I'm going to be a little
like him, without having to go through what he has!
Anne
MONDAY, DECEMBER 27, 1943
Friday evening, for the first time in my life, I received a Christmas present. Mr.
Kleiman, Mr. Kugler and the girls had prepared a wonderful surprise for us. Miep
made a delicious Christmas cake with "Peace 1944" written on top, and Bep provided a
batch of cookies that was up to prewar standards.
There was a jar of yogurt for Peter, Margot and me, and a bottle of beer for each of
the adults. And once again everything was wrapped so nicely, with pretty pictures
glued to the packages. For the rest, the holidays passed by quickly for us.
Anne
WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 29, 1943
I was very sad again last night. Grandma and Hanneli came to me once more.
Grandma, oh, my sweet Grandma. How little we understood what she suffered, how
kind she always was and what an interest she took in everything that concerned us.
And to think that all that time she was carefully guarding her terrible secret. *
[*Anne's grandmother was terminally ill.]
Grandma was always so loyal and good. She would never have let any of us down.
Whatever happened, no matter how much I misbehaved, Grandma always stuck up for
me. Grandma, did you love me, or did you not understand me either? I don't know.
How lonely Grandma must have been, in spite of us. You can be lonely even when
you're loved by many people, since you're still not bd'"dI" any 0 y s one an only.
And Hanneli? Is she still alive? What's she doing? Dear God, watch over her and bring
her back to us. Hanneli, you're a reminder of what my fate might have been. I keep
seeing myself in your place. So why am I often miserable about what goes on here?
Shouldn't I be happy, contented and glad, except when I'm thinking of Hanneli and
those suffering along with her? I'm selfish and cowardly. Why do I always think and
dream the most awful things and want to scream in terror? Because, in spite of
everything, I still don't have enough faith in God. He's given me so much, which I
don't deserve, and yet each day I make so many mistakes!
Thinking about the suffering of those you hold dear can reduce you to tears; in fact,
you could spend the whole day crying. The most you can do is pray for God to
perform a miracle and save at least some of them. And I hope I'm doing enough of
that!
Anne
THURSDAY, DECEMBER 30, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
Since the last raging quarrels, things have settled down here, not only between
ourselves, Dussel and "upstairs," but also between Mr. and Mrs. van D. Nevertheless,
a few dark thunderclouds are heading this way, and all because of . . . food. Mrs. van
D. came up with the ridiculous idea of frying fewer potatoes in the morning and saving
them for later in the day. Mother and Dussel and the rest of us didn't agree with her,
so now we're dividing up the potatoes as well. It seems the fats and oils aren't being
doled out fairly, and Mother's going to have to put a stop to it. I'll let you know if
there are any interesting developments. For the last few months now we've been
splitting up the meat (theirs with fat, ours without), the soup (they eat it, we don't),
the potatoes (theirs peeled, ours not), the extras and now the fried potatoes too.
If only we could split up completely!
Yours, Anne
P.S. Bep had a picture postcard of the entire Royal Family copied for me. Juliana
looks very young, and so does the Queen. The three little girls are adorable. It was
incredibly nice of Bep, don't you think?
SUNDAY, JANUARY 2, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
This morning, when I had nothing to do, I leafed through the pages of my diary and
came across so many letters dealing with the subject of "Mother" in such strong terms
that I was shocked. I said to myself, "Anne, is that really you talking about hate? Oh,
Anne, how could you?"
I continued to sit with the open book in my hand and wonder why I was filled with so
much anger and hate that I had to confide it all to you. I tried to understand the Anne
of last year and make apologies for her, because as long as I leave you with these
accusations and don't attempt to explain what prompted them, my conscience won't be
clear. I was suffering then (and still do) from moods that kept my head under water
(figuratively speaking) and allowed me to see things only from my own perspective,
without calmly considering what the others -- those whom I, with my mercurial
temperament, had hurt or offended -- had said, and then acting as they would have
done.
I hid inside myself, thought of no one but myself and calmly wrote down all my joy,
sarcasm and sorrow in my diary. Because this diary has become a kind of memory
book, it means a great deal to me, but I could easily write "over and done with" on
many of its pages.
I was furious at Mother (and still am a lot of the time). It's true, she didn't
understand me, but I didn't understand her either. Because she loved me, she was
tender and affectionate, but because of the difficult situations I put her in, and the sad
circumstances in which she found herself, she was nervous and irritable, so I can
understand why she was often short with me.
I was offended, took it far too much to heart and was insolent and beastly to her,
which, in turn, made her unhappy. We were caught in a vicious circle of
unpleasantness and sorrow. Not a very happy period for either of us, but at least it's
coming to an end. I didn't want to see what was going on, and I felt very sorry for
myself, but that's understandable too.
Those violent outbursts on paper are simply expressions of anger that, in normal life,
I could have worked off by locking myself in my room and stamping my foot a few
times or calling Mother names behind her back.
The period of tearfully passing judgment on Mother is over. I've grown wiser and
Mother's nerves are a bit steadier. Most of the time I manage to hold my tongue
when I'm annoyed, and she does too; so on the surface, we seem to be getting along
better. But there's one thing I can't do, and that's to love Mother with the devotion of
a child.
I soothe my conscience with the thought that it's better for unkind words to be down
on paper than for Mother to have to carry them around in her heart.
Yours, Anne
THURSDAY, JANUARY 6, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Today I have two things to confess. It's going to take a long time, but I have to tell
them to someone, and you're the most likely candidate, since I know you'll keep a
secret, no matter what happens.
The first is about Mother. As you know, I've frequently complained about her and then
tried my best to be nice. I've suddenly realized what's wrong with her. Mother has
said that she sees us more as friends than as daughters. That's all very nice, of
course, except that a friend can't take the place of a mother. I need my mother to set
a good example and be a person I can respect, but in most matters she's an example
of what not to do. I have the feeling that Margot thinks so differently about these
things that she'd never be able to understand what I've just told you. And Father
avoids all conversations having to do with Mother.
I imagine a mother as a woman who, first and foremost, possesses a great deal of
tact, especially toward her adolescent children, and not one who, like Momsy, pokes
fun at me when I cry. Not because I'm in pain, but because of other things.
This may seem trivial, but there's one incident I've never forgiven her for. It happened
one day when I had to go to the dentist. Mother and Margot planned to go with me
and agreed I should take my bicycle. When the dentist was finished and we were back
outside, Margot and Mother very sweetly informed me that they were going downtown
to buy or look at something, I don't remember what, and of course I wanted to go
along. But they said I couldn't come because I had my bike with me. Tears of rage
rushed to my eyes, and Margot and Mother began laughing at me. I was so furious
that I stuck my tongue out at them, right there on the street. A little old lady
happened to be passing by, and she looked terribly shocked. I rode my bike home and
must have cried for hours. Strangely enough, even though Mother has wounded me
thousands of times, this particular wound still stings whenever I think of how angry I
was.
I find it difficult to confess the second one because it's about myself. I'm not prudish,
Kitty, and yet every time they give a blow-by-blow account of their trips to the
bathroom, which they often do, my whole body rises in revolt.
Yesterday I read an article on blushing by Sis Heyster. It was as if she'd addressed it
directly to me. Not that I blush easily, but the rest of the article did apply. What she
basically says is that during puberty girls withdraw into themselves and begin thinking
about the wondrous changes taking place in their bodies. I feel that too, which
probably accounts for my recent embarrassment over Margot, Mother and Father. On
the other hand, Margot is a lot shyer than I am, and yet she's not in the least
embarrassed.
I think that what's happening to me is so wonderful, and I don't just mean the changes
taking place on the outside of my body, but also those on the inside. I never discuss
myself or any of these things with others, which is why I have to talk about them to
myself. Whenever I get my period (and that's only been three times), I have the
feeling that in spite of all the pain, discomfort and mess, I'm carrying around a sweet
secret. So even though it's a nuisance, in a certain way I'm always looking forward to
the time when I'll feel that secret inside me once again.
Sis Heyster also writes that girls my age feel very insecure about themselves and are
just beginning to discover that they're individuals with their own ideas, thoughts and
habits. I'd just turned thirteen when I came here, so I started thinking about myself
and realized that I've become an "independent person" sooner than most girls.
Sometimes when I lie in bed at night I feel a terrible urge to touch my breasts and
listen to the quiet, steady beating of my heart.
Unconsciously, I had these feelings even before I came here. Once when I was
spending the night at Jacque's, I could no longer restrain my curiosity about her body,
which she'd always hidden from me and which I'd never seen. I asked her whether, as
proof of our friendiship, we could touch each other's breasts. Jacque refused.
I also had a terrible desire to kiss her, which I did. Every time I see a female nude,
such as the Venus in my art history book, I go into ecstasy. Sometimes I find them
so exquisite I have to struggle to hold back my tears. If only I had a girlfriend!
THURSDAY, JANUARY 6, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
My longing for someone to talk to has become so unbearable that I somehow took it
into my head to select Peter for this role. On the few occasions when I have gone to
Peter's room during the day, I've always thought it was nice and cozy. But Peter's too
polite to show someone the door when they're bothering him, so I've never dared to
stay long. I've always been afraid he'd think I was a pest. I've been looking for an
excuse to linger in his room and get him talking without his noticing, and yesterday I
got my chance. Peter, you see, is currently going through a crossword-puzzle craze,
and he doesn't do anything else all day. I was helping him, and we soon wound up
sitting across from each other at his table, Peter on the chair and me on the divan.
It gave me a wonderful feeling when I looked into his dark blue eyes and saw how
bashful my unexpected visit had made him. I could read his innermost thoughts, and in
his face I saw a look of helplessness and uncertainty as to how to behave, and at the
same time a flicker of awareness of his masculinity. I saw his shyness, and I melted.
I wanted to say, "Tell me about yourself. Look beneath my chatty exterior." But I
found that it was easier to think up questions than to ask them.
The evening came to a close, and nothing happened, except that I told him about the
article on blushing. Not what I wrote you, of course, just that he would grow more
secure as he got older. "
That night I lay in bed and cried my eyes out, all the i while making sure no one
could hear me. The idea that I had to beg Peter for favors was simply revolting. But
people will do almost anything to satisfy their longings; take me, for example, I've
made up my mind to visit Peter more often and, somehow, get him to talk to me.
You mustn't think I'm in love with Peter, because I'm not. If the van Daans had had a
daughter instead of a son, I'd have tried to make friends with her.
This morning I woke up just before seven and immediately remembered what I'd been
dreaming about. I was sitting on a chair and across from me was Peter. . . Peter
Schiff. We were looking at a book of drawings by Mary Bos. The dream was so vivid
I can even remember some of the drawings. But that wasn't all -- the dream went
on. Peter's eyes suddenly met mine, and I stared for a long time into those velvety
brown eyes. Then he said very softly, "If I'd only known, I'd have come to you long
ago!" I turned abruptly away, overcome by emotion. And then I felt a soft,
oh-so-cool and gentle cheek against mine, and it felt so good, so good . . .
At that point I woke up, still feeling his cheek against mine and his brown eyes
staring deep into my heart, so deep that he could read how much I'd loved him and
how much I still do. Again my eyes filled with tears, and I was sad because I'd lost
him once more, and yet at the same time glad because I knew with certainty that
Peter is still the only one for me. '
It's funny, but I often have such vivid images in my dreams. One night I saw
Grammy* [*Grammy is Anne's grandmother on her father's side, and Grandma her
grandmother on her mother's side.] so clearly that I could even make out her skin of
soft, crinkly velvet. Another time Grandma appeared to me as a guardian angel. After
that it was Hanneli, who still symbolizes to me the suffering of my friends as well as
that of Jews in general, so that when I'm praying for her, I'm also praying for all the
Jews and all those in need.
And now Peter, my dearest Peter. I've never had such a clear mental image of him. I
don't need a photograph, I can see him oh so well.
Yours, Anne
FRIDAY, ]ANUARY 7, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
I'm such an idiot. I forgot that I haven't yet told you the story of my one true love.
When I was a little girl, way back in kindergarten, I took a liking to Sally Kimmel.
His father was gone, and he and his mother lived with an aunt. One of Sally's cousins
was a good-looking, slender, dark-haired boy named Appy, who later turned out to
look like a movie idol and aroused more admiration than the short, comical, chubby
Sally. For a long time we went everywhere together, but aside from that, my love was
unrequited until Peter crossed my path. I had an out-and-out crush on him. He liked
me too, and we were inseparable for one whole summer. I can still see us walking
hand in hand through our neighborhood, Peter in a white cotton suit and me in a short
summer dress. At the end of the summer vacation he went to the seventh grade at
the middle school, while I was in the sixth grade at the grammar school. He'd pick me
up on the way home, or I'd pick him up. Peter was the ideal boy: tall, good-looking
and slender, with a serious, quiet and intelligent face. He had dark hair, beautiful
brown eyes, ruddy cheeks and a nicely pointed nose. I was crazy about his smile,
which made him look so boyish and mischievous.
I'd gone away to the countryside during summer vacation, and when I came back,
Peter was no longer at his old address; he'd moved and was living with a much older
boy, who apparently told him I was just a kid, because Peter stopped seeing me. I
loved him so much that I didn't want to face the truth. I kept clinging to him until the
day I finally realized that if I continued to chase after him, people would say I was
boy-crazy.
The years went by. Peter hung around with girls his own age and no longer bothered
to say hello to me. I started school at the Jewish Lyceum, and several boys in my
class were in love with me. I enjoyed it and felt honored by their attentions, but that
was all. Later on, Hello had a terrible crush on me, but as I've already told you, I
never fell in love again.
There's a saying: "Time heals all wounds." That's how it was with me. I told myself
I'd forgotten Peter and no longer liked him in the least. But my memories of him were
so strong that I had to admit to myself that the only reason I no longer liked him was
that I was jealous of the other girls. This morning I realized that nothing has changed;
on the contrary, as I've grown older and more mature, my love has grown along with
me. I can understand now that Peter thought I was childish, and yet it still hurts to
think he'd forgotten me completely. I saw his face so clearly; I knew for certain that
no one but Peter could have stuck in my mind that way.
I've been in an utter state of confusion today. When Father kissed me this morning, I
wanted to shout, "Oh, if only you were Peter!" I've been thinking of him constantly,
and all day long I've been repeating to myself, "Oh, Petel, my darling, darling Petel . .
."
Where can I find help? I simply have to go on living and praying to God that, if we
ever get out of here, Peter's path will cross mine and he'll gaze into my eyes, read
the love in them and say, "Oh, Anne, if I'd only known, I'd have come to you long
ago."
Once when Father and I were talking about sex, he said I was too young to
understand that kind of desire. But I thought I did understand it, and now I'm sure I
do. Nothing is as dear to me now as my darling Petel!
I saw my face in the mirror, and it looked so different. My eyes were clear and deep,
my cheeks were rosy, which they hadn't been in weeks, my mouth was much softer. I
looked happy, and yet there was something so sad in my expression that the smile
immediately faded from my lips. I'm not happy, since I know Petel's not thinking of
me, and yet I can still feel his beautiful eyes gazing at me and his cool, soft cheek
against mine. . . Oh, Petel, Petel, how am I ever going to free myself from your
image? Wouldn't anyone who took your place be a poor substitute? I love you, with a
love so great that it simply couldn't keep growing inside my heart, but had to leap out
and reveal itself in all its magnitude.
A week ago, even a day ago, if you'd asked me, "Which of your friends do you think
you'd be most likely to marry?" I'd have answered, "Sally, since he makes me feel
good, peaceful and safe!" But now I'd cry, "Petel, because I love him with all my
heart and all my soul. I surrender myself completely!" Except for that one thing: he
may touch my face, but that's as far as it goes.
This morning I imagined I was in the front attic with Petel, sitting on the floor by the
windows, and after talking for a while, we both began to cry. Moments later I felt his
mouth and his wonderful cheek! Oh, Petel, come to me. Think of me, my dearest
Petel!
WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 12, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Bep's been back for the last two weeks, though her sister won't be allowed back at
school until next week. Bep herself spent two days in bed with a bad cold. Miep and
Jan were also out for two days, with upset stomachs.
I'm currently going through a dance and ballet craze and am diligently practicing my
dance steps every evening. I've made an ultramodern dance costume out of a lacy
lavender slip belonging to Momsy. Bias tape is threaded through the top and tied just
above the bust. A pink corded ribbon completes the ensemble. I tried to turn my
tennis shoes into ballet slippers, but with no success. My stiff limbs are well on the
way to becoming as limber as they used to be. A terrific exercise is to sit on the
floor, place a heel in each hand and raise both legs in the air. I have to sit on a
cushion, because otherwise my poor backside really takes a beating.
Everyone here is reading a book called A Cloudless Morning. Mother thought it was
extremely good because it describes a number of adolescent problems. I thought to
myself, a bit ironically, "Why don't you take more interest in your own adolescents
first!"
I think Mother believes that Margot and I have a better relationship with our parents
than anyone in the whole wide world, and that no mother is more involved in the lives
of her children than she is. She must have my sister in mind, since I don't believe
Margot has the same problems and thoughts as I do. Far be it from me to point out
to Mother that one of her daughters is not at all what she imagines. She'd be
completely bewildered, and anyway, she'd never be able to change; I'd like to spare
her that grief, especially since I know that everything would remain the same. Mother
does sense that Margot loves her much more than I do, but she thinks I'm just going
through a phase.
Margot's gotten much nicer. She seems a lot different than she used to be. She's not
nearly as catty these days and is becoming a real friend. She no longer thinks of me
as a litde kid who doesn't count.
It's funny, but I can sometimes see myself as others see me. I take a leisurely look
at the person called "Anne Frank" and browse through the pages of her life as though
she were a stranger.
Before I came here, when I didn't think about things as much as I do now, I
occasionally had the feeling that I didn't belong to Momsy, Pim and Margot and that I
would always be an outsider. I sometimes went around for six months at a time
pretending I was an orphan. Then I'd chastise myself for playing the victim, when
really, I'd always been so fortunate. After that I'd force myself to be friendly for a
while. Every morning when I heard footsteps on the stairs, I hoped it would be
Mother coming to say good morning. I'd greet her warmly, because I honesly did look
forward to her affectionate glance. But then she'd snap at me for having made some
comment or other (and I'd go off to school feeling completely discouraged.
On the way home I'd make excuses for her, telling myself that she had so many
worries. I'd arrive home in high spirits, chatting nineteen to the dozen, until the events
of the morning would repeat themselves and I'd leave the room with my schoolbag in
my hand and a pensive look on my face. Sometimes I'd decide to stay angry, but then
I always had so much to talk about after school that I'd forget my resolution and want
Mother to stop whatever she was doing and lend a willing ear. Then the time would
come once more when I no longer listened for the steps on the stairs and felt lonely
and cried into my pillow every night.
Everything has gotten much worse here. But you already knew that. Now God has sent
someone to help me: Peter. I fondle my pendant, press it to my lips and think, "What
do I care! Petel is mine and nobody knows it!" With this in mind, I can rise above
every nasty remark. Which of the people here would suspect that so much is going on
in the mind of a teenage girl?
SATURDAY, JANUARY 15, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
There's no reason for me to go on describing all our quarrels and arguments down to
the last detail. It's enough to tell you that we've divided many things like meat and
fats and oils and are frying our own potatoes. Recently we've been eating a little
extra rye bread because by four o'clock we're so hungry for dinner we can barely
control our rumbling stomachs.
Mother's birthday is rapidly approaching. She received some extra sugar from Mr.
Kugler, which sparked off jealousy on the part of the van Daans, because Mrs. van D.
didn't receive any on her birthday. But what's the point of boring you with harsh
words, spiteful conversations and tears when you know they bore us even more?
Mother has expressed a wish, which isn't likely to come true any time soon: not to
have to see Mr. van Daan's face for two whole weeks. I wonder if everyone who
shares a house sooner or later ends up at odds with their fellow residents. Or have
we just had a stroke of bad luck? At mealtime, when Dussel helps himself to a
quarter of the half-filled gravy boat and leaves the rest of us to do without, I lose
my appetite and feel like jumping to my feet, knocking him off his chair and throwing
him out the door.
Are most people so stingy and selfish? I've gained some insight into human nature
since I came here, which is good, but I've had enough for the present. Peter says the
same.
The war is going to go on despite our quarrels and our longing for freedom and fresh
air, so we should try to make the best of our stay here.
I'm preaching, but I also believe that if I live here much longer, I'll turn into a
dried-up old beanstalk. And all I really want is to be an honest-to-goodness
teenager!
Yours, Anne
WEDNESDAY EVENING, JANUARY 19, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
I (there I go again!) don't know what's happened, but since my dream I keep noticing
how I've changed. By the way, I dreamed about Peter again last night and once again I
felt his eyes penetrate mine, but this dream was less vivid and not quite as beautiful
as the last.
You know that I always used to be jealous of Margot's relationship with Father.
There's not a trace of my jealousy left now; I still feel hurt when Father's nerves
cause him to be unreasonable toward me, but then I think, "I can't blame you for
being the way you are. You talk so much about the minds of children and adolescents,
but you don't know the first thing about them!" I long for more than Father's
affection, more than his hugs and kisses. Isn't it awful of me to be so preoccupied
with myself? Shouldn't I, who want to be good and kind, forgive them first? I forgive
Mother too, but every time she makes a sarcastic remark or laughs at me, it's all I
can do to control myself.
I know I'm far from being what I should; will I ever be?
Anne Frank
P.S. Father asked if I told you about the cake. For Mother's birthday, she received a
real mocha cake, prewar quality, from the office. It was a really nice day! But at the
moment there's no room in my head for things like that.
SATURDAY, JANUARY 22, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Can you tell me why people go to such lengths to hide their real selves? Or why I
always behave very differently when I'm in the company of others? Why do people
have so little trust in one another? I know there must be a reason, but sometimes I
think it's horrible that you can't ever confide in anyone, not even those closest to you.
It seems as if I've grown up since the night I had that dream, as if I've become more
independent. You'll be amazed when I tell you that even my attitude toward the van
Daans has changed. I've stopped looking at all the discussions and arguments from my
family's biased point of view. What's brought on such a radical change? Well, you see,
I suddenly realized that if Mother had been different, if she'd been a real mom, our
relationship would have been very, very different. Mrs. van Daan is by no means a
wonderful person, yet half the arguments could have been avoided if Mother hadn't
been so hard to deal with every time they got onto a tricky subject. Mrs. van Daan
does have one good point, though: you can talk to her. She may be selfish, stingy and
underhanded, but she'll readily back down as long as you don't provoke her and make
her unreasonable. This tactic doesn't work every time, but if you're patient, you can
keep trying and see how far you get.
All the conflicts about our upbringing, about not pampering children, about the food
-- about everything, absolutely everything -- might have taken a different turn if
we'd remained open and on friendly terms instead of always seeing the worst side.
I know exactly what you're going to say, Kitty.
"But, Anne, are these words really coming from your lips? From you, who have had to
put up with so many unkind words from upstairs? From you, who are aware of all the
injustices?"
And yet they are coming from me. I want to take a fresh look at things and form my
own opinion, not just ape my parents, as in the proverb "The apple never falls far
from the tree." I want to reexamine the van Daans and decide for myself what's true
and what's been blown out of proportion. If I wind up being disappointed in them, I
can always side with Father and Mother. But if not, I can try to change their attitude.
And if that doesn't work, I'll have to stick with my own opinions and judgment. I'll
take every opportunity to speak openly to Mrs. van D. about our many differences and
not be afraid -- despite my reputation as a smart aleck -- to offer my impartial
opinion. I won't say anything negative about my own family, though that doesn't mean
I won't defend them if somebody else does, and as of today, my gossiping is a thing
of the past.
Up to now I was absolutely convinced that the van Daans were entirely to blame for
the quarrels, but now I'm sure the fault was largely ours. We were right as far as the
subject matter was concerned, but intelligent people (such as ourselves!) should have
more insight into how to deal with others.
I hope I've got at least a touch of that insight, and that I'll find an occasion to put it
to good use.
Yours, Anne
MONDAY, JANUARY 24, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
A very strange thing has happened to me. (Actually, "happened" isn't quite the right
word.)
Before I came here, whenever anyone at home or at school talked about sex, they
were either secretive or disgusting. Any words having to do with sex were spoken in
a low whisper, and kids who weren't in the know were often laughed at. That struck
me as odd, and I often wondered why people were so mysterious or obnoxious when
they talked about this subject. But because I couldn't change things, I said as little as
possible or asked my girlfriends for information.
After I'd learned quite a lot, Mother once said to me, "Anne, let me give you some
good advice. Never discuss this with boys, and if they bring it up, don't answer them."
I still remember my exact reply. "No, of course not," I exclaimed. "Imagine!" And
nothing more was said.
When we first went into hiding, Father often told me about things I'd rather have
heard from Mother, and I learned the rest from books or things I picked up in
conversations.
Peter van Daan wasn't ever as obnoxious about this subject as the boys at school. Or
maybe just once or twice, in the beginning, though he wasn't trying to get me to talk.
Mrs. van Daan once told us she'd never discussed these matters with Peter, and as far
as she knew, neither had her husband. Apparently she didn't even know how much
Peter knew or where he got his information.
Yesterday, when Margot, Peter and I were peeling potatoes, the conversation somehow
turned to Boche. "We're still not sure whether Boche is a boy or a girl, are we?" I
asked.
Yes we are, he answered. "Boche is a tomcat."
I began to laugh. "Some tomcat if he's pregnant."
Peter and Margot joined in the laughter. You see, a month or two ago Peter informed
us that Boche was sure to have kittens before long, because her stomach was rapidly
swelling. However, Boche's fat tummy turned out to be due to a bunch of stolen
bones. No kittens were growing inside, much less about to be born.
Peter felt called upon to defend himself against my accusation. "Come with me. You
can see for yourself. I was horsing around with the cat one day, and I could definitely
see it was a 'he.' "
Unable to restrain my curiosity, I went with him to the warehouse. Boche, however,
wasn't receiving visitors at that hour, and was nowhere in sight. We waited for a
while, but when it got cold, we went back upstairs.
Later that afternoon I heard Peter go downstairs for the second time. I mustered the
courage to walk through the silent house by myself and reached the warehouse. Boche
was on the packing table, playing with Peter, who was getting ready to put him on the
scale and weigh him.
"Hi, do you want to have a look?" Without any preliminaries, he picked up the cat,
turned him over on his back, deftly held his head and paws and began the lesson.
"This is the male sexual organ, these are a few stray hairs, and that's his backside."
The cat flipped himself over and stood up on his little white feet.
If any other boy had pointed out the "male sexual organ" to me, I would never have
given him a second glance. But Peter went on talking in a normal voice about what is
otherwise a very awkward subject. Nor did he have any ulterior motives. By the time
he'd finished, I felt so much at ease that I started acting normally too. We played
with Boche, had a good time, chatted a bit and finally sauntered through the long
warehouse to the door. "Were you there when Mouschi was fixed?"
"Yeah, sure. It doesn't take long. They give the cat an anesthetic, of course."
"Do they take something out?"
"No, the vet just snips the tube. There's nothing to see on the outside."
I had to get up my nerve to ask a question, since it wasn't as "normal" as I thought.
"Peter, the German word Geschlechtsteil means 'sexual organ,' doesn't it? But then the
male and female ones have different names."
"I know that."
"The female one is a vagina, that I know, but I don't know what it's called in males."
"Oh well," I said. "How are we supposed to know these words? Most of the time you
just come across them by accident."
"Why wait? I'll ask my parents. They know more than I do and they've had more
experience."
We were already on the stairs, so nothing more was said.
Yes, it really did happen. I'd never have talked to a girl about this in such a normal
tone of voice. I'm also certain that this isn't what Mother meant when she warned me
about boys.
All the same, I wasn't exactly my usual self for the rest of the day. When I thought
back to our talk, it struck me as odd. But I've learned at least one thing: there are
young people, even those of the opposite sex, who can discuss these things naturally,
without cracking jokes.
Is Peter really going to ask his parents a lot of questions? Is he really the way he
seemed yesterday?
Oh, what do I know?!!!
Yours, Anne
FRIDAY, JANUARY 28, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
In recent weeks I've developed a great liking for family trees and the genealogical
tables of royal families. I've come to the conclusion that once you begin your search,
you have to keep digging deeper and deeper into the past, which leads you to even
more interesting discoveries.
Although I'm extremely diligent when it comes to my schoolwork and can pretty much
follow the BBC Home Service on the radio, I still spend many of my Sundays sorting
out and looking over my movie-star collection, which has grown to a very respectable
size. Mr. Kugler makes me happy every Monday by bringing me a copy of Cinema &
Theater magazine. The less worldly members of our household often refer to this
small indulgence as a waste of money, yet they never fail to be surprised at how
accurately I can list the actors in any given movie, even after a year. Bep, who often
goes to the movies with her boyfriend on her day off, tells me on
Saturday the name of the show they're going to see, and I then proceed to rattle off
the names of the leading actors and actresses and the reviews. Moms recently
remarked ; that I wouldn't need to go to the movies later on, because !
I know all the plots, the names of the stars and the reviews by heart.
Whenever I come sailing in with a new hairstyle, I I can read the disapproval on their
faces, and I can be sure someone will ask which movie star I'm trying to imitate. My
reply, that it's my own invention, is greeted with ~ skepticism. As for the hairdo, it
doesn't hold its set for ~ more than half an hour. By that time I'm so sick and tired i
of their remarks that I race to the bathroom and restore my hair to its normal mass
of curls.
Yours, Anne
FRIDAY, JANUARY 28, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
This morning I was wondering whether you ever felt like a cow, having to chew my
stale news over and over again until you're so fed up with the monotonous fare that
you yawn and secretly wish Anne would dig up something new.
Sorry, I know you find it dull as ditchwater, but imagine how sick and tired I am of
hearing the same old stuff. If the talk at mealtime isn't about politics or good food,
then Mother or Mrs. van D. trot out stories about their childhood that we've heard a
thousand times before, or Dussel goes on and on about beautiful racehorses, his
Charlotte's extensive wardrobe, leaky rowboats, boys who can swim at the age of four,
aching muscles and frightened patients. It all boils down to this: whenever one of the
eight of us opens his mouth, the other seven can finish the story for him. We know
the punch line of every joke before it gets told, so that whoever's telling it is left to
laugh alone. The various milkmen, grocers and butchers of the two former housewives
have been praised to the skies or run into the ground so many times that in our
imaginations they've grown as old as Methuselah; there's absolutely no chance of
anything new or fresh being brought up for discussion in the Annex.
Still, all this might be bearable if only the grown-ups weren't in the habit of repeating
the stories we hear from Mr. Kleiman, jan or Miep, each time embellishing them with
a few details of their own, so that I often have to pinch my arm under the table to
keep myself from setting the enthusiastic storyteller on the right track. Little children,
such as Anne, must never, ever correct their elders, no matter how many blunders
they make or how often they let their imaginations run away with them.
Jan and Mr. Kleiman love talking about people who have gone underground or into
hiding; they know we're eager to hear about others in our situation and that we truly
sympathize with the sorrow of those who've been arrested as well as the joy of
prisoners who've been freed.
Going underground or into hiding has become as routine as the proverbial pipe and
slippers that used to await the man of the house after a long day at work. There are
many resistance groups, such as Free Netherlands, that forge identity cards, provide
financial support to those in hiding, organize hiding places and find work for young
Christians who go underground. It's amazing how much these generous and unselfish
people do, risking their own lives to help and save others.
The best example of this is our own helpers, who have managed to pull us through so
far and will hopefully bring us safely to shore, because otherwise they'll find
themselves sharing the fate of those they're trying to protect. Never have they uttered
a single word about the burden we must be, never have they complained that we're
too much trouble. They come upstairs every day and talk to the men about business
and politics, to the women about food and wartime difficulties and to the children
about books and newspapers. They put on their most cheerful expressions, bring
flowers and gifts for birthdays and holidays and are always ready to do what they can.
That's something we should never forget; while others display their heroism in battle
or against the Germans, our helpers prove theirs every day by their good spirits and
affection.
The most bizarre stories are making the rounds, yet most of them are really true. For
instance, Mr. Kleiman reported this week that a soccer match was held in the province
of Gelderland; one team consisted entirely of men who had gone underground, and the
other of eleven Military Policemen. In Hilversum, new registration cards were issued.
In order for the many people in hiding to get their rations (you have to show this
card to obtain your ration book or else pay 60 guilders a book), the registrar asked all
those hiding in that district to pick up their cards at a specified hour, when the
documents could be collected at a separate table.
All the same, you have to be careful that stunts like these don't reach the ears of the
Germans.
Yours, Anne
SUNDAY, JANUARY 30, 1944
My dearest Kit,
Another Sunday has rolled around; I don't mind them as much as I did in the
beginning, but they're boring enough.
I still haven't gone to the warehouse yet, but maybe sometime soon. Last night I went
downstairs in the dark, all by myself, after having been there with Father a few nights
before. I stood at the top of the stairs while German planes flew back and forth, and I
knew I was on my own, that I couldn't count on others for support. My fear vanished.
I looked up at the sky and trusted in God.
I have an intense need to be alone. Father has noticed I'm not my usual self, but I
can't tell him what's bothering me. All I want to do is scream "Let me be, leave me
alone!"
Who knows, perhaps the day will come when I'm left alone more than I'd like!
Anne Frank
THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 3, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Invasion fever is mounting daily throughout the country. If you were here, I'm sure
you'd be as impressed as I am at the many preparations, though you'd no doubt laugh
at all the fuss we're making. Who knows, it may all be for nothing!
The papers are full of invasion news and are driving everyone insane with such
statements as: "In the event of a British landing in Holland, the Germans will do what
they can to defend the country, even flooding it, if necessary." They've published
maps of Holland with the potential flood areas marked. Since large portions of
Amsterdam were shaded in, our first question was what we should do if the water in
the streets rose to above our waists. This tricky question elicited a variety of
responses:
"It'll be impossible to walk or ride a bike, so we'll have to wade through the water."
"Don't be silly. We'll have to try and swim. We'll all put on our bathing suits and caps
and swim underwater as much as we can, so nobody can see we're Jews."
"Oh, baloney! I can just imagine the ladies swimming with the rats biting their legs!"
(That was a man, of course; we'll see who screams loudest!)
"We won't even be able to leave the house. The warehouse is so unstable it'll collapse
if there's a flood."
"Listen, everyone, all joking aside, we really ought to try and get a boat."
"Why bother? I have a better idea. We can each take a packing crate from the attic
and row with a wooden spoon."
"I'm going to walk on stilts. I used to be a whiz at it when I was young."
"Jan Gies won't need to. He'll let his wife ride piggyback, and then Miep will be on
stilts."
So now you have a rough idea of what's going on, don't you, Kit? This lighthearted
banter is all very amusing, but reality will prove otherwise. The second question about
the invasion was bound to arise: what should we do if the Germans evacuate
Amsterdam?
"Leave the city along with the others. Disguise ourselves as well as we can."
"Whatever happens, don't go outside! The best thing to do is to stay put! The
Germans are capable of herding the entire population of Holland into Germany, where
they'll all die."
"Of course we'll stay here. This is the safest place.
We'll try to talk Kleiman and his family into coming here to live with us. We'll
somehow get hold of a bag of wood shavings, so we can sleep on the floor. Let's ask
Miep and Kleiman to bring some blankets, just in case. And we'll order some extra
cereal grains to supplement the sixty-five pounds we already have. Jan can try to find
some more beans. At the moment we've got about sixty-five pounds of beans and ten
pounds of split peas. And don't forget the fifty cans of vegetables."
"What about the rest, Mother? Give us the latest figures.' ,
"Ten cans of fish, forty cans of milk, twenty pounds of powdered milk, three bottles
of oil, four crocks of butter, four jars of meat, two big jars of strawberries, two jars
of raspberries, twenty jars of tomatoes, ten pounds of oatmeal, nine pounds of rice.
That's it."
Our provisions are holding out fairly well. All the same, we have to feed the office
staff, which means dipping into our stock every week, so it's not as much as it seems.
We have enough coal and firewood, candles too.
"Let's all make little moneybags to hide in our clothes so we can take our money with
us if we need to leave here."
"We can make lists of what to take first in case we have to run for it, and pack our
knapsacks in advance."
"When the time comes, we'll put two people on the lookout, one in the loft at the
front of the house and one in the back."
"Hey, what's the use of so much food if there isn't any water, gas or electricity?"
"We'll have to cook on the wood stove. Filter the water and boil it. We should clean
some big jugs and fill them with water. We can also store water in the three kettles
we use for canning, and in the washtub."
"Besides, we still have about two hundred and thirty pounds of winter potatoes in the
spice storeroom."
All day long that's all I hear. Invasion, invasion, nothing but invasion. Arguments about
going hungry, dying, bombs, fire extinguishers, sleeping bags, identity cards, poison
gas, etc., etc. Not exactly cheerful.
A good example of the explicit warnings of the male contingent is the following
conversation with Jan:
Annex: "We're afraid that when the Germans retreat, they'll take the entire population
with them."
Jan: "That's impossible. They haven't got enough trains."
Annex: "Trains? Do you really think they'd put civilians on trains? Absolutely not.
Everyone would have to hoof it." (Or, as Dussel always says, per pedes apostolorum.)
Jan: "I can't believe that. You're always looking on the dark side. What reason would
they have to round up all the civilians and take them along?"
Annex: "Don't you remember Goebbels saying that if the Germans have to go, they'll
slam the doors to all the occupied territories behind them?"
Jan: "They've said a lot of things."
Annex: "Do you think the Germans are too noble or humane to do it? Their reasoning
is: if we go under, we'll drag everyone else down with us."
Jan: "You can say what you like, I just don't believe
Annex: "It's always the same old story. No one wants to see the danger until it's
staring them in the face."
Jan: "But you don't know anything for sure. You're just making an assumption."
Annex: "Because we've already been through it all ourselves, First in Germany and
then here. What do you think's happening in Russia?"
Jan: "You shouldn't include the Jews. I don't think anyone knows what's going on in
Russia. The British and the Russians are probably exaggerating for propaganda
purposes, just like the Germans."
Annex: "Absolutely not. The BBC has always told the truth. And even if the news is
slightly exaggerated, the facts are bad enough as they are. You can't deny that
millions of peace-loving citizens in Poland and Russia have been murdered or gassed."
I'll spare you the rest of our conversations. I'm very calm and take no notice of all
the fuss. I've reached the point where I hardly care whether I live or die. The world
will keep on turning without me, and I can't do anything to change events anyway. I'll
just let matters take their course and concentrate on studying and hope that everything
will be all right in the end.
Yours, Anne
TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 8, 1944
Dear Kitty,
I can't tell you how I feel. One minute I'm longing for peace and quiet, and the next
for a little fun. We've forgotten how to laugh -- I mean, laughing so hard you can t
stop.
This morning I had "the giggles"; you know, the kind we used to have at school.
Margot and I were giggling like real teenagers.
Last night there was another scene with Mother. Margot was tucking her wool blanket
around her when suddenly she leapt out of bed and carefully examined the blanket.
What do you think she found? A pin! Mother had patched the blanket and forgotten to
take it out. Father shook his head meaningfully and made a comment about how
careless Mother is. Soon afterward Mother came in from the bathroom, and just to
tease her I said, "Du bist doch eine echte Rabenmutter." [Oh, you are cruel.]
Of course, she asked me why I'd said that, and we told her about the pin she'd
overlooked. She immediately assumed her haughtiest expression and said, "You're a
fine one to talk. When you're sewing, the entire floor is covered with pins. And look,
you've left the manicure set lying around again. You never put that away either!"
I said I hadn't used it, and Margot backed me up, since she was the guilty party.
Mother went on talking about how messy I was until I got fed up and said, rather
curtly, "I wasn't even the one who said you were careless. I'm always getting blamed
for other people's mistakes!"
Mother fell silent, and less than a minute later I was obliged to kiss her good-night.
This incident may not have been very important, but these days everything gets on
my nerves.
Anne Mary Frank
SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 12, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
The sun is shining, the sky is deep blue, there's a magnificent breeze, and I'm longing
-- really longing -- for everything: conversation, freedom, friends, being alone. I
long. . . to cry! I feel as if I were about to explode. I know crying would help, but I
can't cry. I'm restless. I walk from one room to another, breathe through the crack in
the window frame, feel my heart beating as if to say, "Fulfill my longing at last. . ."
I think spring is inside me. I feel spring awakening, I feel it in my entire body and
soul. I have to force myself to act normally. I'm in a state of utter confusion, don't
know what to read, what to write, what to do. I only know that I'm longing for
something. . .
Yours, Anne
186 ANNE FRANK
MONDAY, FEBRUARY 14, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
A lot has changed for me since Saturday. What's happened is this: I was longing for
something (and still am), but. . . a small, a very small, part of the problem has been
resolved.
On Sunday morning I noticed, to my great joy (I'll be honest with you), that Peter
kept looking at me. Not in the usual way. I don't know, I can't explain it, but I
suddenly had the feeling he wasn't as in love with Margot as I used to think. All day
long I tried not to look at him too much, because whenever I did, I caught him looking
at me and then -- well, it made me feel wonderful inside, and that's not a feeling I
should have too often.
Sunday evening everyone, except Pim and me, was clustered around the radio,
listening to the "Immortal Music of the German Masters." Dussel kept twisting and
turning the knobs, which annoyed Peter, and the others too. After restraining himself
for half an hour, Peter asked somewhat irritably if he would stop fiddling with the
radio. Dussel replied in his haughtiest tone, "Ich mach' das schon!" [I'll decide that.]
Peter got angry and made an insolent remark. Mr. van Daan sided with him, and
Dussel had to back down. That was it.
The reason for the disagreement wasn't particularly interesting in and of itself, but
Peter has apparently taken the matter very much to heart, because this morning, when
I was rummaging around in the crate of books in the attic, Peter came up and began
telling me what had happened. I didn't know anything about it, but Peter soon realized
he'd found an attentive listener and started warming up to his subject.
"Well, it's like this," he said. "I don't usually talk much, since I know beforehand I'll
just be tongue-tied. I start stuttering and blushing and I twist my words around so
much I finally have to stop, because I can't find the right words. That's what happened
yesterday. I meant to say something entirely different, but once I started, I got all
mixed up. It's awful. I used to have a bad habit, and sometimes I wish I still did:
whenever I was mad at someone, I'd beat them up instead of arguing with them. I
know this method won't get me anywhere, and that's why I admire you. You're never
at a loss for words: you say exactly what you want to say and aren't in the least bit
shy."
"Oh, you're wrong about that," I replied. "Most of what I say comes out very
differently from the way I'd planned. Plus I talk too much and too long, and that's just
as bad."
"Maybe, but you have the advantage that no one can see you're embarrassed. You
don't blush or go to pieces."
I couldn't help being secretly amused at his words. However, since I wanted him to go
on talking quietly about himself, I hid my laughter, sat down on a cushion on the floor,
wrapped my arms around my knees and gazed at him intently.
I'm glad there's someone else in this house who flies into the same rages as I do.
Peter seemed relieved that he could criticize Dussel without being afraid I'd tell. As
for me, I was pleased too, because I sensed a strong feeling of fellowship, which I
only remember having had with my girlfriends.
Yours, Anne
TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 15, 1944
The minor run-in with Dussel had several repercussions, for which he had only
himself to blame. Monday evening Dussel came in to see Mother and told her
triumphantly that Peter had asked him that morning if he'd slept well, and then added
how sorry he was about what had happened Sunday evening -- he hadn't really
meant what he'd said. Dussel assured him he hadn't taken it to heart. So everYthing
was right as rain again. Mother passed this story on to me, and I was secretly amazed
that Peter, who'd been so angry at Dussel, had humbled himself, despite all his
assurances to the contrary.
I couldn't refrain from sounding Peter out on the subject, and he instantly replied that
Dussel had been lying. You should have seen Peter's face. I wish I'd had a camera.
Indignation, rage, indecision, agitation and much more crossed his face in rapid
succession.
That evening Mr. van Daan and Peter really told Dussel off. But it couldn't have been
all that bad, since Peter had another dental appointment today.
Actually, they never wanted to speak to each other again.
WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 16, 1944
Peter and I hadn't talked to each other all day, except for a few meaningless words. It
was too cold to go up to the attic, and anyway, it was Margot's birthday. At
twelve-thirty he came to look at the presents and hung around chatting longer than
was strictly necessary, something he'd never have done otherwise. But I got my
chance in the afternoon. Since I felt like spoiling Margot on her birthday, I went to
get the coffee, and after that the potatoes. When I came to Peter's room, he
immediately took his papers off the stairs, and I asked if I should close the trapdoor
to the attic.
"Sure," he said, "go ahead. When you're ready to come back down, just knock and I'll
open it for you."
I thanked him, went upstairs and spent at least ten minutes searching around in the
barrel for the smallest potatoes. My back started aching, and the attic was cold.
Naturally, I didn't bother to knock but opened the trap-door myself. But he obligingly
got up and took the pan out of my hands.
"I did my best, but I couldn't find any smaller ones."
"Did you look in the big barrel?"
"Yes, I've been through them all."
By this time I was at the bottom of the stairs, and he examined the pan of potatoes
he was still holding. "Oh, but these are fine," he said, and added, as I took the pan
from him, "My compliments!"
As he said this, he gave me such a warm, tender look that I started glowing inside. I
could tell he wanted to please me, but since he couldn't make a long complimentary
speech, he said everything with his eyes. I understood him so well and was very
grateful. It still makes me happy to think back to those words and that look!
When I went downstairs, Mother said she needed more potatoes, this time for dinner,
so I volunteered to go back up. When I entered Peter's room, I apologized for
disturbing him again. As I was going up the stairs, he stood up, went over to stand
between the stairs and the wall, grabbed my arm and tried to stop me.
"I'll go," he said. "I have to go upstairs anyway."
I replied that it wasn't really necessary, that I didn't have to get only the small ones
this time. Convinced, he let go of my arm. On my way back, he opened the trapdoor
and once again took the pan from me. Standing by the door, I asked, "What are you
working on?"
"French," he replied.
I asked if I could take a look at his lessons. Then I went to wash my hands and sat
down across from him on the divan.
After I'd explained some French to him, we began to talk. He told me that after the
war he wanted to go to the Dutch East Indies and live on a rubber plantation. He
talked about his life at home, the black market and how he felt like a worthless bum.
I told him he had a big inferiority complex. He talked about the war, saying that
Russia and England were bound to go to war against each other, and about the Jews.
He said life would have been much easier if he'd been a Christian or could become
one after the war. I asked if he wanted to be baptized, but that wasn't what he meant
either. He said he'd never be able to feel like a Christian, but that after the war he'd
make sure nobody would know he was Jewish. I felt a momentary pang. It's such a
shame he still has a touch of dishonesty in him.
Peter added, "The Jews have been and always will be the chosen people!"
I answered, "Just this once, I hope they'll be chosen for something good!"
But we went on chatting very pleasantly, about Father, about judging human character
and all sorts of things, so many that I can't even remember them all.
I left at a quarter past five, because Bep had arrived.
That evening he said something else I thought was nice. We were talking about the
picture of a movie star I'd once given him, which has been hanging in his room for at
least a year and a half. He liked it so much that I offered to give him a few more.
"No," he replied, "I'd rather keep the one I've got. I look at it every day, and the
people in it have become my friends."
I now have a better understanding of why he always hugs Mouschi so tightly. He
obviously needs affection too. I forgot to mention something else he was talking about.
He said, "No, I'm not afraid, except when it comes to things about myself, but I'm
working on that."
Peter has a huge inferiority complex. For example, he always thinks he's so stupid and
we're so smart. When I help him with French, he thanks me a thousand times. One of
these days I'm going to say, "Oh, cut it out! You're much better at English and
geography!"
Anne Frank
THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 17, 1944
Dear Kitty,
I was upstairs this morning, since I promised Mrs. van D. I'd read her some of my
stories. I began with "Eva's Dream," which she liked a lot, and then I read a few
passages from "The Secret Annex," which had her in stitches. Peter also listened for a
while (just the last part) and asked if I'd come to his room sometime to read more.
I decided I had to take a chance right then and there, so I got my notebook and let
him read that bit where Cady and Hans talk about God. I can't really tell what kind of
impression it made on him. He said something I don't quite remember, not about
whether it was good, but about the idea behind it. I told him I just wanted him to see
that I didn't write only amusing things. He nodded, and I left the room. We'll see if I
hear anything more!
Yours, Anne Frank
FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 18, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
Whenever I go upstairs, it's always so I can see "him." Now that I have something to
look forward to, my life here has improved greatly.
At least the object of my friendship is always here, and I don't have to be afraid of
rivals (except for Margot). Don't think I'm in love, because I'm not, but I do have the
feeling that something beautiful is going to develop between Peter and me, a kind of
friendship and a feeling of trust. I go see him whenever I get the chance, and it's not
the way it used to be, when he didn't know what to make of me. On the contrary,
he's still talking away as I'm heading out the door. Mother doesn't like me going
upstairs. She always says I'm bothering Peter and that I should leave him alone.
Honestly, can't she credit me with some intuition? She always looks at me so oddly
when I go to Peter's room. When I come down again, she asks me where I've been.
It's terrible, but I'm beginning to hate her!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 19, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
It's Saturday again, and that should tell you enough. This morning all was quiet. I
spent nearly an hour upstairs making meatballs, but I only spoke to "him" in passing.
When everyone went upstairs at two-thirty to either read or take a nap, I went
downstairs, with blanket and all, to sit at the desk and read or write. Before long I
couldn't take it anymore. I put my head in my arms and sobbed my heart out. The
tears streamed down my cheeks, and I felt desperately unhappy. Oh, if only' 'he" had
come to comfort me.
It was past four by the time I went upstairs again. At five o'clock I set off to get
some potatoes, hoping once again that we'd meet, but while I was still in the bathroom
fixing my hair, he went to see Boche.
I wanted to help Mrs. van D. and went upstairs with my book and everything, but
suddenly I felt the tears coming again. I raced downstairs to the bathroom, grabbing
the hand mirror on the way. I sat there on the toilet, fully dressed, long after I was
through, my tears leaving dark spots on the red of my apron, and I felt utterly
dejected.
Here's what was going through my mind: "Oh, I'll never reach Peter this way. Who
knows, maybe he doesn't even like me and he doesn't need anyone to confide in.
Maybe he only thinks of me in a casual sort of way. I'll have to go back to being
alone, without anyone to confide in and without Peter, without hope, comfort or
anything to look forward to. Oh, if only I could rest my head on his shoulder and not
feel so hopelessly alone and deserted! Who knows, maybe he doesn't care for me at
all and looks at the others in the same tender way. Maybe I only imagined it was
especially for me. Oh, Peter, if only you could hear me or see me. If the truth is
disappointing, I won't be able to bear it."
A little later I felt hopeful and full of expectation again, though my tears were still
flowing -- on the inside.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 20, 1944
What happens in other people's houses during the rest of the week happens here in
the Annex on Sundays. While other people put on their best clothes and go strolling in
the sun, we scrub, sweep and do the laundry.
Eight o'clock. Though the rest of us prefer to sleep in,
Dussel gets up at eight. He goes to the bathroom, then downstairs, then up again and
then to the bathroom, where he devotes a whole hour to washing himself.
Nine-thirty. The stoves are lit, the blackout screen is taken down, and Mr. van Daan
heads for the bathroom. One of my Sunday morning ordeals is having to lie in bed and
look at Dussel's back when he's praying. I know it sounds strange, but a praying
Dussel is a terrible sight to behold. It's not that he cries or gets sentimental, not at
all, but he does spend a quarter of an hour -- an entire fifteen minutes -- rocking
from his toes to his heels. Back and forth, back and forth. It goes on forever, and if I
don't shut my eyes tight, my head starts to spin.
Ten-fifteen. The van Daans whistle; the bathroom's free. In the Frank family quarters,
the first sleepy faces are beginning to emerge from their pillows. Then everything
happens fast, fast, fast. Margot and I take turns doing the laundry. Since it's quite
cold downstairs, we put on pants and head scarves. Meanwhile, Father is busy in the
bathroom. Either Margot or I have a turn in the bathroom at eleven, and then we're all
clean.
Eleven-thirty. Breakfast. I won't dwell on this, since there's enough talk about food
without my bringing the subject up as well.
Twelve-fifteen. We each go our separate ways. Father, clad in overalls, gets down on
his hands and knees and brushes the rug so vigorously that the room is enveloped in a
cloud of dust. Mr. Dussel makes the beds (all wrong, of course), always whistling the
same Beethoven violin concerto as he goes about his work. Mother can be heard
shuffling around the attic as she hangs up the washing. Mr. van Daan puts on his hat
and disappears into the lower regions, usually followed by Peter and Mouschi. Mrs.
van D. dons a long apron, a black wool jacket and overshoes, winds a red wool scarf
around her head, scoops up a bundle of dirty laundry and, with a well-rehearsed
washerwoman's nod, heads downstairs. Margot and I do the dishes and straighten up
the room.
WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 23,1944
My dearest Kitty,
The weather's been wonderful since yesterday, and I've perked up quite a bit. My
writing, the best thing I have, is coming along well. I go to the attic almost every
morning to get the stale air out of my lungs. This morning when I went there, Peter
was busy cleaning up. He finished quickly and came over to where I was sitting on
my favorite spot on the floor. The two of us looked out at the blue sky, the bare
chestnut tree glistening with dew, the seagulls and other birds glinting with silver as
they swooped through the air, and we were so moved and entranced that we couldn't
speak. He stood with his head against a thick beam, while I sat. We breathed in the
air, looked outside and both felt that the spell shouldn't be broken with words. We
remained like this for a long while, and by the time he had to go to the loft to chop
wood, I knew he was a good, decent boy. He climbed the ladder to the loft, and I
followed; during the fifteen minutes he was chopping wood, we didn't say a word
either. I watched him from where I was standing, and could see he was obviously
doing his best to chop the right way and show off his strength. But I also looked out
the open window, letting my eyes roam over a large part of Amsterdam, over the
rooftops and on to the horizon, a strip of blue so pale it was almost invisible.
"As long as this exists," I thought, "this sunshine and this cloudless sky, and as long
as I can enjoy it, how can I be sad?"
The best remedy for those who are frightened, lonely or unhappy is to go outside,
somewhere they can be alone, alone with the sky, nature and God. For then and only
then can you feel that everything is as it should be and that God wants people to be
happy amid nature's beauty and simplicity.
As long as this exists, and that should be forever, I know that there will be solace for
every sorrow, whatever the circumstances. I firmly believe that nature can bring
comfort to all who suffer.
Oh, who knows, perhaps it won't be long before I can share this overwhelming feeling
of happiness with someone who feels the same as I do.
Yours, Anne
P.S. Thoughts: To Peter.
We've been missing out on so much here, so very much, and for such a long time. I
miss it just as much as you do. I'm not talking about external things, since we're well
provided for in that sense; I mean the internal things. Like you, I long for freedom
and fresh air, but I think we've been amply compensated for their loss. On the inside,
I mean.
This morning, when I was sitting in front of the window and taking a long, deep look
outside at God and nature, I was happy, just plain happy. Peter, as long as people feel
that kind of happiness within themselves, the joy of nature, health and much more
besides, they'll always be able to recapture that happiness.
Riches, prestige, everything can be lost. But the happiness in your own heart can only
be dimmed; it will always be there, as long as you live, to make you happy again.
Whenever you're feeling lonely or sad, try going to the loft on a beautiful day and
looking outside. Not at the houses and the rooftops, but at the sky. As long as you
can look fearlessly at the sky, you'll know that you're pure within and will find
happiness once more.
SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 27, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
From early in the morning to late at night, all I do is think about Peter. I fall asleep
with his image before my eyes, dream about him and wake up with him still looking at
me.
I have the strong feeling that Peter and I aren't really as different as we may seem
on the surface, and I'll explain why: neither Peter nor I have a mother. His is too
superficial, likes to flirt and doesn't concern herself much with what goes on in his
head. Mine takes an active interest in my life, but has no tact, sensitivity or motherly
understanding.
Both Peter and I are struggling with our innermost feelings. We're still unsure of
ourselves and are too vulnerable, emotionally, to be dealt with so roughly. Whenever
that happens, I want to run outside or hide my feelings. Instead, I bang the pots and
pans, splash the water and am generally noisy, so that everyone wishes I were miles
away. Peter's reaction is to shut himself up, say little, sit quietly and daydream, all
the while carefully hiding his true self.
But how and when will we finally reach each other?
I don't know how much longer I can continue to keep this yearning under control.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
MONDAY, FEBRUARY 28, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
It's like a nightmare, one that goes on long after I'm awake. I see him nearly every
hour of the day and yet I can't be with him, I can't let the others notice, and I have
to pretend to be cheerful, though my heart is aching.
Peter Schiff and Peter van Daan have melted into one Peter, who's good and kind and
whom I long for desperately. Mother's horrible, Father's nice, which makes him even
more exasperating, and Margot's the worst, since she takes advantage of my smiling
face to claim me for herself, when all I want is to be left alone.
Peter didn't join me in the attic, but went up to the loft to do some carpentry work.
At every rasp and bang, another chunk of my courage broke off and I was even more
unhappy. In the distance a clock was tolling' 'Be pure in heart, be pure in mind!"
I'm sentimental, I know. I'm despondent and foolish, I know that too.
Oh, help me!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 1, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
My own affairs have been pushed to the background by . . . a break-in. I'm boring
you with all my break-ins, but what can I do when burglars take such pleasure in
honoring Gies & Go. with their presence? This incident is much more complicated than
the last one, in July 1943.
Last night at seven-thirty Mr. van Daan was heading, as usual, for Mr. Kugler's office
when he saw that both the glass door and the office door were open. He was
surprised, but he went on through and was even more astonished to see that the
alcove doors were open as well and that there was a terrible mess in the front office.
"There's been a burglary" flashed through his mind. But just to make sure, he went
downstairs to the front door, checked the lock and found everything closed. "Bep and
Peter must just have been very careless this evening," Mr. van. D. concluded. He
remained for a while in Mr. Kugler's office, switched off the lamp and went upstairs
without worrying much about the open doors or the messy office.
Early this morning Peter knocked at our door to tell us that the front door was wide
open and that the projector and Mr. Kugler's new briefcase had disappeared from the
closet. Peter was instructed to lock the door. Mr. van Daan told us his discoveries of
the night before, and we were extremely worried.
The only explanation is that the burglar must have had a duplicate key, since there
were no signs of a forced entry. He must have sneaked in early in the evening, shut
the door behind him, hidden himself when he heard Mr. van Daan, fled with the loot
after Mr. van Daan went upstairs and, in his hurry, not bothered to shut the door.
Who could have our key? Why didn't the burglar go to the warehouse? Was it one of
our own warehouse employees, and will he turn us in, now that he's heard Mr. van
Daan and maybe even seen him?
It's really scary, since we don't know whether the burglar will take it into his head to
try and get in again. Or was he so startled when he heard someone else in the
building that he'll stay away?
Yours, Anne
P.S. We'd be delighted if you could hunt up a good detective for us. Obviously, there's
one condotion: he must be relied upon not to mform on people in hiding.
THURSDAY, MARCH 2, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Margot and I were in the attic together today. I can't enjoy being there with her the
way I imagine it'd be with Peter (or someone else). I know she feels the same about
most things as I do!
While doing the dishes, Bep began talking to Mother and Mrs. van Daan about how
discouraged she gets. What help did those two offer her? Our tactless mother,
especially, only made things go from bad to worse. Do you know what her advice
was? That she should think about all the other people in the world who are suffering!
How can thinking about the misery of others help if you're miserable yourself? I said
as much. Their response, of course, was that I should stay out of conversations of
this sort.
The grown-ups are such idiots! As if Peter, Margot, Bep and I didn't all have the
same feelings. The only thing that helps is a mother's love, or that of a very, very
close friend. But these two mothers don't understand the first thing about us! Perhaps
Mrs. van Daan does, a bit more than Mother. Oh, I wish I could have said something
to poor Bep, something that I know from my own experience would have helped. But
Father came between us, pushing me roughly aside. They're all so stupid!
I also talked to Margot about Father and Mother, about how nice it could be here if
they weren't so aggravating. We'd be able to organize evenings in which everyone
could take turns discussing a given subject. But we've already been through all that.
It's impossible for me to talk here! Mr. van Daan goes on the offensive, Mother i gets
sarcastic and can't say anythina in a normal voice, Father doesn't feel like taking part,
nor does Mr. Dussel, and Mrs. van D. is attacked so often that she just sits there
with a red face, hardly able to put up a fight anymore. And what about us? We aren't
allowed to have an opinion! My, my, aren't they progressive! Not have an opinion!
People can tell you to shut up, but they can't keep you from having an opinion. You
can't forbid someone to have an opinion, no matter how young they are! The only
thing that would help Bep, Margot, Peter and me would be great love and devotion,
which we don't get here. And no one, especially not the idiotic sages around here, is
capable of understanding us, since we're more sensitive and much more advanced in
our thinking than any of them ever suspect!
Love, what is love? I don't think you can really put it into words. Love is
understanding someone, caring for him, sharing his joys and sorrows. This eventually
includes physical love. You've shared something, given something away and received
something in return, whether or not you're married, whether or not you have a baby.
Losing your virtue doesn't matter, as long as you know that for as long as you live
you'll have someone at your side who understands you, and who doesn't have to be
shared with anyone else!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
At the moment, Mother's grouching at me again; she's clearly jealous because I talk to
Mrs. van Daan more than to her. What do I care!
I managed to get hold of Peter this afternoon, and we talked for at least forty-five
minutes. He wanted to tell me something about himself, but didn't find it easy. He
finally got it out, though it took a long time. I honestly didn't know whether it was
better for me to stay or to go. But I wanted so much to help him! I told him about
Bep and how tactless our mothers are. He told me that his parents fight constantly,
about politics and cigarettes and all kinds of things. As I've told you before, Peter's
very shy, but not too shy to admit that he'd be perfectly happy not to see his parents
for a year or two. "My father isn't as nice as he looks," he said. "But in the matter of
the cigarettes, Mother's absolutely right."
I also told him about my mother. But he came to Father's defense. He thought he was
a "terrific guy."
Tonight when I was hanging up my apron after doing the dishes, he called me over
and asked me not to say anything downstairs about his parents' having had another
argument and not being on speaking terms. I promised, though I'd already told Margot.
But I'm sure Margot won't pass it on.
"Oh no, Peter," I said, you don't have to worry about me. I've learned not to blab
everything I hear. I never repeat what you tell me."
He was glad to hear that. I also told him what terrible gossips we are, and said,
"Margot's quite right, of course, when she says I'm not being honest, because as much
as I want to stop gossiping, there's nothing I like better than discussing Mr. Dussel."
"It's good that you admit it," he said. He blushed, and his sincere compliment almost
embarrassed me too.
Then we talked about "upstairs" and "downstairs" some more. Peter was really rather
surprised to hear that don't like his parents. "Peter," I said, "you know I'm always
honest, so why shouldn't I tell you this as well? We can see their faults too."
I added, "Peter, I'd really like to help you. Will you let me? You're caught in an
awkward position, and I know, even though you don't say anything, that it upsets you."
"Oh, your help is always welcome!"
"Maybe it'd be better for you to talk to Father. You can tell him anything, he won't
pass it on."
"I know, he's a real pal."
"You like him a lot, don't you?"
Peter nodded, and I continued, "Well, he likes you too, you know!"
He looked up quickly and blushed. It was really touching to see how happy these few
words made him.
"You think so?" he asked.
"Yes," I said. "You can tell from the little things he lets slip now and then."
Then Mr. van Daan came in to do some dictating.
Peter's a "terrific guy," just like Father!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
FRIDAY, MARCH 3,1944
My dearest Kitty,
When I looked into the candle tonight, I felt calm and happy again. It seems Grandma
is in that candle, and it's Grandma who watches over and protects me and makes me
feel happy again. But. . . there's someone else who governs all my moods and that's. .
. Peter. I went to get the potatoes today, and while I was standing on the stairway
with my pan full, he asked, "What did you do during the lunch break?"
I sat down on the stairs, and we began to talk. The potatoes didn't make it to the
kitchen until five-fifteen (an hour after I'd gone to get them). Peter didn't say
anything more about his parents; we just talked about books and about the past. Oh,
he gazes at me with such warmth in his eyes; I don't think it will take much for me
to fall in love with him.
He brought the subject up this evening. I went to his room after peeling potatoes and
remarked on how hot it was. "You can tell the temperature by looking at Margot and
me, because we turn white when it's cold and red when it's hot." I said.
"In love?" he asked.
"Why should I be in love?" It was a pretty silly answer (or, rather, question).
"Why not?" he said, and then it was time for dinner.
What did he mean? Today I finally managed to ask him whether my chatter bothered
him. All he said was,
"Oh, it's fine with me!" I can't tell how much of his reply was due to shyness.
Kitty, I sound like someone who's in love and can talk about nothing but her dearest
darling. And Peter is a darling. Will I ever be able to tell him that? Only if he thinks
the same of me, but I'm the kind of person you have to treat with kid gloves, I know
that all too well.
And he likes to be left alone, so I don't know how much he likes me. In any case,
we're getting to know each other a little better. I wish we dared to say more. But
who knows, maybe that time will come sooner than I think!
Once or twice a day he gives me a knowing glance, I wink back, and we're both
happy. It seems crazy to talk about his being happy, and yet I have the overwhelming
feeling he thinks the same way I do.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
SATURDAY, MARCH 4, 1944
Dear Kitty,
This is the first Saturday in months that hasn't been tiresome, dreary and boring. The
reason is Peter. This morning as I was on my way to the attic to hang up my apron,
Father asked whether I wanted to stay and practice my French, and I said yes. We
spoke French together for a while and I explained something to Peter, and then we
worked on our English. Father read aloud from Dickens, and I was in seventh heaven,
since I was sitting on Father's chair, close to Peter.
I went downstairs at quarter to eleven. When I went back up at eleven-thirty, Peter
was already waiting for me on the stairs. We talked until quarter to one. Whenever I
leave the room, for example after a meal, and Peter has a chance and no one else can
hear, he says, "Bye, Anne, see you later."
Oh, I'm so happy! I wonder if he's going to fall in love with me after all? In any case,
he's a nice boy, and you have no idea how good it is to talk to him!
Mrs. van D. thinks it's all right for me to talk to
Peter, but today she asked me teasingly, "Can I trust you two up there?"
"Of course," I protested. "I take that as an insult!"
Morning, noon and night, I look forward to seeing Peter.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
PS. Before I forget, last night everything was blanketed in snow. Now it's thawed and
there's almost nothing left.
MONDAY, MARCH 6, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Ever since Peter told me about his parents, I've felt a certain sense of responsibthty
toward him-don't you think that's strange? It's as though their quarrels were just as
much my business as his, and yet I don't dare bring it up anymore, because I'm afraid
it makes him uncomfortable. I wouldn't want to intrude, not for all the money in the
world.
I can tell by Peter's face that he ponders things just as deeply as I do. Last night I
was annoyed when Mrs. van D. scoffed, "The thinker!" Peter flushed and looked
embarrassed, and I nearly blew my top.
Why don't these people keep their mouths shut?
You can't imagine what it's like to have to stand on the sidelines and see how lonely
he is, without being able to do anything. I can imagine, as if I were in his place, how
despondent he must sometimes feel at the quarrels. And about love. Poor Peter, he
needs to be loved so much!
It sounded so cold when he said he didn't need any friends. Oh, he's so wrong! I don't
think he means it. He clings to his masculinity, his solitude and his feigned indifference so he can maintain his role, so he'll never, ever have to show his feelings.
Poor Peter, how long can he keep it up? Won't he explode from this superhuman
effort?
Oh, Peter, if only I could help you, if only you would let me! Together we could
banish our loneliness, yours and mine!
I've been doing a great deal of thinking, but not saying much. I'm happy when I see
him, and happier still if the sun shines when we're together. I washed my hair
yesterday, and because I knew he was next door, I was very rambunctious. I couldn't
help it; the more quiet and serious I am on the inside, the noisier I get on the
outside!
Who will be the first to discover the chink in my armor?
It's just as well that the van Daans don't have a daughter. My conquest could never be
so challenging, so beautiful and so nice with someone of the same sex!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
PS. You know I'm always honest with you, so I think I should tell you that I live from
one encounter to the next. I keep hoping to discover that he's dying to see me, and
I'm in raptures when I notice his bashful attempts. I think he'd like to be able to
express himself as easily as I do; little does he know it's his awkwardness that I find
so touching.
TUESDAY, MARCH 7,1944
Dearest Kitty,
When I think back to my life in 1942, it all seems so unreal. The Anne Frank who
enjoyed that heavenly existence was completely different from the one who has grown
wise within these walls. Yes, it was heavenly. Five admirers on every street corner,
twenty or so friends, the favorite of most of my teachers, spoiled rotten by Father
and Mother, bags full of candy and a big allowance. What more could anyone ask for?
You're probably wondering how I could have charmed all those people. Peter says It s
ecause I m "attractive," but that isn't it entirely. The teachers were amused and
entertained by my clever answers, my witty remarks, my smthng face and my critical
mind. That's all I was: a terrible flirt, coquettish and amusing. I had a few plus points,
which kept me in everybody's good graces: I was hardworking, honest and generous. I
would never have refused anyone who wanted to peek at my answers, I was
magnanimous with my candy, and I wasn't stuck-up.
Would all that admiration eventually have made me overconfident? It's a good thing
that, at the height of my glory, I was suddenly plunged into reality. It took me more
than a year to get used to doing without admiration.
How did they see me at school? As the class comedian, the eternal ringleader, never
in a bad mood, never a crybaby. Was it any wonder that everyone wanted to bicycle
to school with me or do me little favors?
I look back at that Anne Frank as a pleasant, amusing, but superficial girl, who has
nothing to do with me. What did Peter say about me? "Whenever I saw you, you were
surrounded by a flock of girls and at least two boys, you were always laughing, and
you were always the center of attention!" He was right.
What's remained of that Anne Frank? Oh, I haven't forgotten how to laugh or toss off
a remark, I'm just as good, if not better, at raking people over the coals, and I can
still flirt and be amusing, if I want to be . . .
But there's the catch. I'd like to live that seemingly carefree and happy life for an
evening, a few days, a week. At the end of that week I'd be exhausted, and would be
grateful to the first person to talk to me about something meaningful. I want friends,
not admirers. Peo- ple who respect me for my character and my deeds, not my
flattering smile. The circle around me would be much smaller, but what does that
matter, as long as they're sincere?
In spite of everything, I wasn't altogether happy in 1942; I often felt I'd been
deserted, but because I was on the go all day long, I didn't think about it. I enjoyed
myself as much as I could, trying consciously or unconsciously to fill the void with
jokes.
Looking back, I realize that this period of my life has irrevocably come to a close; my
happy-go-lucky, carefree schooldays are gone forever. I don't even miss them. I've
outgrown them. I can no longer just kid around, since my serious side is always there.
I see my life up to New Year's 1944 as if I were looking through a powerful
magnifying glass. When I was at home, my life was filled with sunshine. Then, in the
middle of 1942, everything changed overnight. The quarrels, the accusations -- I
couldn't take it all in. I was caught off guard, and the only way I knew to keep my
bearings was to talk back.
The first half of 1943 brought crying spells, loneliness and the gradual realization of
my faults and short- comings, which were numerous and seemed even more so. I
filled the day with chatter, tried to draw Pim closer to me and failed. This left me on
my own to face the difficult task of improving myself so I wouldn't have to hear their
reproaches, because they made me so despondent.
The second half of the year was slightly better. I became a teenager, and was treated
more like a grown-up. I began to think about things and to write stories, finally
coming to the conclusion that the others no longer had anything to do with me. They
had no right to swing me back and forth like a pendulum on a clock. I wanted to
change myself in my own way. I realized I could man- age without my mother,
completely and totally, and that hurt. But what affected me even more was the
realization that I was never going to be able to confide in Father. I didn't trust anyone
but myself.
After New Year's the second big change occurred: my dream, through which I
discovered my longing for . . . a boy; not for a girlfriend, but for a boyfriend. I also
discovered an inner happiness underneath my superficial and cheerful exterior. From
time to time I was quiet. Now I live only for Peter, since what happens to me in the
future depends largely on him!
I lie in bed at night, after ending my prayers with the words "Ich Janke air fur all das
Cute una Liebe una Schone,"* [* Thank you, God, for all that is good and dear and
beautiful.] and I'm filled with joy. I think of going into hiding, my health and my
whole being as das Cute; Peter's love (which is still so new and fragile and which
neither of us dares to say aloud), the future, happiness and love as das Liebe; the
world, nature and the tremendous beauty of everything, all that splendor, as das
Schone.
At such moments I don't think about all the misery, but about the beauty that still
remains. This is where Mother and I differ greatly. Her advice in the face of
melancholy is: "Think about all the suffering in the world and be thankful you're not
part of it." My advice is: "Go outside, to the country, enjoy the sun and all nature has
to offer. Go outside and try to recapture the happiness within yourself; think of all the
beauty in yourself and in everything around you and be happy."
I don't think Mother's advice can be right, because what are you supposed to do if
you become part of the suffering? You'd be completely lost. On the contrary, beauty
remains, even in misfortune. If you just look for it, you discover more and more
happiness and regain your balance. A person who's happy will make others happy; a
person who has courage and faith will never die in misery!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 8, 1944
Margot and I have been writing each other notes, just for fun, of course.
Anne: It's strange, but I can only remember the day after what has happened the night
before. For example, I suddenly remembered that Mr. Dussel was snoring loudly last
night. (It's now quarter to three on Wednesday af- ternoon and Mr. Dussel is snoring
again, which is why it flashed through my mind, of course.) When I had to use the
potty, I deliberately made more noise to get the snoring to stop.
Margot: Which is better, the snoring or the gasping for air?
Anne: The snoring's better, because it stops when I make noise, without waking the
person in question.
What I didn't write to Margot, but what I'll confess to you, dear Kitty, is that I've
been dreaming of Peter a great deal. The night before last I dreamed I was skating
right here in our living room with that little boy from the Apollo ice-skating rink; he
was with his sister, the girl with the spindly legs who always wore the same blue
dress. I introduced myself, overdoing it a bit, and asked him his name. It was Peter.
In my dream I wondered just how many Peters I actually knew!
Then I dreamed we were standing in Peter's room, facing each other beside the stairs.
I said something to him; he gave me a kiss, but replied that he didn't love me all that
much and that I shouldn't flirt. In a desperate and pleading voice I said, "I'm not
flirting, Peter!"
When I woke up, I was glad Peter hasn't said it after all.
Last night I dreamed we were kissing each other, but
Peter's cheeks were very disappointing: they weren't as soft as they looked. They
were more like Father's cheeks -- the cheeks of a man who already shaves.
FRIDAY, MARCH 10, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
The proverb "Misfortunes never come singly" defi- nitely applies to today. Peter just
got through saying it. Let me tell you all the awful things that have happened and that
are still hanging over our heads.
First, Miep is sick, as a result of Henk and Aagje's wedding yesterday. She caught
cold in the Westerkerk, where the service was held. Second, Mr. Kleiman hasn't
returned to work since the last time his stomach started bleeding, so Bep's been left
to hold down the fort alone. Third, the police have arrested a man (whose name I
won't put in writing). It's terrible not only for him, but for us as well, since he's been
supplying us with potatoes, butter and jam. Mr. M., as I'll call him, has five children
under the age of thirteen, and another on the way.
Last night we had another little scare: we were in the middle of dinner when suddenly
someone knocked on the wall next door. For the rest of the evening we were nervous
and gloomy.
Lately I haven't been at all in the mood to write down what's been going on here. I've
been more wrapped up in myself. Don't get me wrong, I'm terribly upset about what's
happened to poor, good-hearted Mr. M., but there's not much room for him in my
diary.
Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday I was in Peter's room from four-thirty to
five-fifteen. We worked on our French and chatted about one thing and another. I
really look forward to that hour or so in the afternoon, but best of all is that I think
Peter's just as pleased to see me.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL 213
SATURDAY, MARCH 11, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
I haven't been able to sit still lately. I wander up- stairs and down and then back
again. I like talking to Peter, but I'm always afraid of being a nuisance. He's told me a
bit about the past, about his parents and about himself, but it's not enough, and every
five minutes I wonder why I find myself longing for more. He used to think I was a
real pain in the neck, and the feeling was mutual. I've changed my mind, but how do I
know he's changed his? I think he has, but that doesn't necessarily mean we have to
become the best of friends, although as far as I'm concerned, it would make our time
here more bearable. But I won't let this drive me crazy. I spend enough time thinking
about him and don't have to get you all worked up as well, simply because I'm so
miserable!
SUNDAY, MARCH 12, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Things are getting crazier here as the days go by.
Peter hasn't looked at me since yesterday. He's been acting as if he's mad at me. I'm
doing my best not to chase after him and to talk to him as little as possible, but it's
not easy! What's going on, what makes him keep me at arm's length one minute and
rush back to my side the next? Perhaps I'm imagining that it's worse than it really is.
Perhaps he's just moody like me, and tomorrow everything will be all right again!
I have the hardest time trying to maintain a normal facade when I'm feeling so
wretched and sad. I have to talk, help around the house, sit with the others and,
above all, act cheerful! Most of all I miss the outdoors and having a place where I can
be alone for as long as I want! I think I'm getting everything all mixed up, Kitty, but
then, I'm in a state of utter confusion: on the one hand, I'm half crazy with desire for
him, can hardly be in the same room without looking at him; and on the other hand, I
wonder why he should matter to me so much and why I can't be calm again!
Day and night, during every waking hour, I do nothing but ask myself, "Have you
given him enough chance to be alone? Have you been spending too much time
upstairs? Do you talk too much about serious subjects he's not yet ready to talk
about? Maybe he doesn't even like you? Has it all been your imagination? But then
why has he told you so much about himself? Is he sorry he did?" And a whole lot
more.
Yesterday afternoon I was so worn out by the sad news from the outside that I lay
down on my divan for a nap. All I wanted was to sleep and not have to think. I slept
until four, but then I had to go next door. It wasn't easy, answering all Mother's
questions and inventing an excuse to explain my nap to Father. I pleaded a headache,
which wasn't a lie, since I did have one. . . on the inside!
Ordinary people, ordinary girls, teenagers like myself, would think I'm a little nuts
with all my self-pity. But that's just it. I pour my heart out to you, and the rest of
the time I'm as impudent, cheerful and self-confident as possible to avoid questions
and keep from getting on my own nerves.
Margot is very kind and would like me to confide in her, but I can't tell her
everything. She takes me too seriously, far too seriously, and spends a lot of time
thinking about her loony sister, looking at me closely whenever I open my mouth and
wondering, "Is she acting, or does she really mean it?"
It's because we're always together. I don't want the person I confide in to be around
me all the time. When will I untangle my jumbled thoughts? When will I find inner
peace again?
Yours, Anne
TUESDAY, MARCH 14, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
It might be amusing for you (though not for me) to hear what we're going to eat
today. The cleaning lady is working downstairs, so at the moment I'm seated at the
van Daans' oilcloth-covered table with a handkerchief sprinkled with fragrant prewar
perfume pressed to my nose and mouth. You probably don't have the faintest idea
what I'm talking about, so let me "begin at the begin- ning." The people who supply
us with food coupons have been arrested, so we have just our five black-market ra-
-, tion books-no coupons, no fats and oils. Since Miep and Mr. Kleiman are sick
again, Bep can't manage the shop- ping. The food is wretched, and so are we. As of
tomor- row, we won't have a scrap of fat, butter or margarine. We can't eat fried
potatoes for breakfast (which we've been doing to save on bread), so we're having hot
cereal instead, and because Mrs. van D. thinks we're starving, we bought some
half-and-half. Lunch today consists of mashed potatoes and pickled kale. This
explains the precautionary measure with the handkerchief. You wouldn't believe how
much kale can stink when it's a few years old! The kitchen smells like a mixture of
spoiled plums, rotten eggs and brine. Ugh, just the thought of having to eat that muck
makes me want to throw up! Besides that, our potatoes have contracted such strange
diseases that one out of every two buckets of pommes de terre winds up in the
garbage. We entertain ourselves by trying to figure out which disease they've got, and
we've reached the conclusion that they suffer from cancer, smallpox and measles.
Honestly, being in hiding during the fourth year of the war is no picnic. If only the
whole stinking mess were over!
To tell you the truth, the food wouldn't matter so much to me if life here were more
pleasant in other ways. But that's just it: this tedious existence is starting to make us
all disagreeable. Here are the opinions of the five grown-ups on the present situation
(children aren't allowed to have opinions, and for once I'm sticking to the rules):
Mrs. van Daan: "I'd stopped wanting to be queen of the kitchen long ago. But sitting
around doing nothing was boring, so I went back to cooking. Still, I can't help
complaining: it's impossible to cook without oil, and all those disgusting smells make
me sick to my stomach. Besides, what do I get in return for my efforts? Ingratitude
and rude remarks. I'm always the black sheep; I get blamed for everything. What's
more, it's my opinion that the war is making very little progress. The Germans will
win in the end. I'm terrified that we're going to starve, and when I'm in a bad mood, I
snap at everyone who comes near."
Mr. van Daan: "I just smoke and smoke and smoke. Then the food, the political
situation and Kerli's moods don't seem so bad. Kerli's a sweetheart. If I don't have
anything to smoke, I get sick, then I need to eat meat, life becomes unbearable,
nothing's good enough, and there's bound to be a flaming row. My Kerli's an idiot."
Mrs. Frank: "Food's not very important, but I'd love a slice of rye bread right now,
because I'm so hungry. If I were Mrs. van Daan, I'd have put a stop to Mr. van
Daan's smoking long ago. But I desperately need a cigarette now, because my head's
in such a whirl. The van Daans are horrible people; the English may make a lot of
mistakes, but the war is progressing. I should keep my mouth shut and be grateful I'm
not in Poland."
Mr. Frank: "Everything's fine, I don't need a thing. Stay calm, we've got plenty of
time. Just give me my potatoes, and I'll be quiet. Better set aside some of my rations
for Bep. The political situation is improving, I'm extremely optimistic."
Mr. Dussel: "I must complete the task I've set for myself, everything must be finished
on time. The political situation is looking 'gut,' it's 'eempossible' for us to get caught.
Me, me, me . . . ."
Yours, Anne
THURSDAY, MARCH 16, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Whew! Released from the gloom and doom for a few moments! All I've been hearing
today is: "If this and that happens, we're in trouble, and if so-and-so gets sick, we'll
be left to fend for ourselves, and if . . ."
Well, you know the rest, or at any rate I assume you're famthar enough with the
residents of the Annex to guess what they'd be talking about.
The reason for all the "ifs" is that Mr. Kugler has been called up for a six-day work
detail, Bep is down with a bad cold and will probably have to stay home tomorrow,
Miep hasn't gotten over her flu, and Mr. Kleiman's stom- ach bled so much he lost
consciousness. What a tale of woe!
We think Mr. Kugler should go directly to a reliable doctor for a medical certificate of
ill health, which he can present to the City Hall in Hilversum. The warehouse --
employees have been given a day off tomorrow, so Bep will be alone in the office. If
(there's another "if') Bep has to stay home, the door will remain locked and we'll have
to be as quiet as mice so the Keg Company won't hear us. At one o'clock Jan will
come for half an hour to check on us poor forsaken souls, like a zookeeper.
This afternoon, for the first time in ages, Jan gave us some news of the outside
world. You should have seen us gathered around him; it looked exactly like a print:
"At Grandmother's Knee."
He regaled his grateful audience with talk of-what else?-food. Mrs. P., a friend of
Miep's, has been cooking his meals. The day before yesterday Jan ate carrots with
green peas, yesterday he had the leftovers, today she's cooking marrowfat peas, and
tomorrow she's plan- ning to mash the remaining carrots with potatoes.
We asked about Miep's doctor.
"Doctor?" said Jan. "What doctor? I called him this morning and got his secretary on
the line. I asked for a flu prescription and was told I could come pick it up tomorrow morning between eight and nine. If you've got a particularly bad case of flu, the
doctor himself comes to the phone and says, 'Stick out your tongue and say "Aah."
Oh, I can hear it, your throat's infected. I'll write out a prescription and you can bring
it to the phar- macy. Good day.' And that's that. Easy job he's got, diagnosis by
phone. But I shouldn't blame the doctors." After all, a person has only two hands, and
these days there're too many patients and too few doctors."
Still, we all had a good laugh at Jan's phone call. I can just imagine what a doctor's
waiting room looks like these days. Doctors no longer turn up their noses at the
poorer patients, but at those with minor illnesses. "Hey, what are you doing here?"
they think. "Go to the end of the line; real patients have priority!"
Yours, Anne
THURSDAY, MARCH 16, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
The weather is gorgeous, indescribably beautiful; I'll be going up to the attic in a
moment.
I now know why I'm so much more restless than Peter. He has his own room, where
he can work, dream, think and sleep. I'm constantly being chased from one corner to
another. I'm never alone in the room I share with Dussel, though I long to be so
much. That's another reason I take refuge in the attic. When I'm there, or with you, I
can be myself, at least for a little while. Still, I don't want to moan and groan. On the
contrary, I want to be brave!
Thank goodness the others notice nothing of my innermost feelings, except that every
day I'm growing cooler and more contemptuous of Mother, less affection- ate to
Father and less willing to share a single thought with Margot; I'm closed up tighter
than a drum. Above all, I have to maintain my air of confidence. No one must know
that my heart and mind are constantly at war with each other. Up to now reason has
always won the battle, but will my emotions get the upper hand? Sometimes I fear
they will, but more often I actually hope they do!
Oh, it's so terribly hard not to talk to Peter about these things, but I know I have to
let him begin; it's so hard to act during the daytime as if everything I've said and
done in my dreams had never taken place! Kitty, Anne is crazy, but then these are
crazy times and even crazier circumstances.
The nicest part is being able to write down all my thoughts and feelings; otherwise,
I'd absolutely suffocate. I wonder what Peter thinks about all these things? I keep
thinking I'll be able to talk to him about them one day. He must have guessed
something about the inner me, since he couldn't possibly love the outer Anne he's
known so far! How could someone like Peter, who loves peace and quiet, possibly
stand my bustle and noise? Will he be the first and only person to see what's beneath
my granite mask? Will it take him long? Isn't there some old saying about love being
akin to pity? Isn't that what's happening here as well? Because I often pity him as
much as I do myself!
I honestly don't know how to begin, I really don't, so how can I expect Peter to when
talking is so much harder for him? If only I could write to him, then at least he'd
know what I was trying to say, since it's so hard to say it out loud!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
FRIDAY, MARCH 17, 1944
My dearest darling,
Everything turned out all right after all; Bep just had a sore throat, not the flu, and
Mr. Kugler got a medical certificate to excuse him from the work detail. The entire
Annex breathed a huge sigh of relief. Everything's fine here! Except that Margot and I
are rather tired of our parents.
Don't get me wrong. I still love Father as much as ever and Margot loves both Father
and Mother, but when you're as old as we are, you want to make a few decisions for
yourself, get out from under their thumb. Whenever I go upstairs, they ask what I'm
going to do, they won't let me salt my food, Mother asks me every evening at
eight-fifteen if it isn't time for me to change into my nighty, I and they have to
approve every book I read. I must admit, they're not at all strict about that and let
me read nearly everything, but Margot and I are sick and tired of having to listen to
their comments and questions all day long.
There's something else that displeases them: I no longer feel like giving them little
kisses morning, noon and night. All those cute nicknames seem so affected, and
Father's fondness for talking about farting and going to the bathroom is disgusting. In
short, I'd like nothing better than to do without their company for a while, and they
don't understand that. Not that Margot and I have ever said any of this to them. What
would be the point? They wouldn't understand anyway.
Margot said last night, "What really bothers me is that if you happen to put your head
in your hands and sigh once or twice, they immediately ask whether you have a
headache or don't feel well."
For both of us, it's been quite a blow to suddenly realize that very little remains of
the close and harmoni- ous family we used to have at home! This is mostly because
everything's out of kilter here. By that I mean that we're treated like children when it
comes to external matters, while, inwardly, we're much older than other girls our age.
Even though I'm only fourteen, I know what I want, I know who's right and who's
wrong, I have my own opinions, ideas and principles, and though it may sound odd
coming from a teenager, I feel I'm more of a person than a child -- I feel I'm
completely independent of others. I know I'm better at debating or carrying on a
discussion than Mother, I know I'm more objective, I don't exaggerate as much, I'm
much tidier and better with my hands, and because of that I feel (this may make you
laugh) that I'm superior to her in many ways. To love someone, I have to admire and
respect the person, but I feel neither respect nor admiration for Mother!
Everything would be all right if only I had Peter, since I admire him in many ways.
He's so decent and clever!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
SATURDAY, MARCH 18, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
I've told you more about myself and my feelings than I've ever told a living soul, so
why shouldn't that include sex?
Parents, and people in general, are very peculiar when it comes to sex. Instead of
telling their sons and daughters everything at the age of twelve, they send the
children out of the room the moment the subject arises and leave them to find out
everything on their own. Later on, when parents notice that their children have,
somehow, come by their information, they assume they know more (or less) than they
actually do. So why don't they try to make amends by asking them what's what?
A major stumbling block for the adults -- though in my opinion it's no more than a
pebble -- is that they're afraid their children will no longer look upon marriage as
sacred and pure once they realize that, in most cases, this purity is a lot of nonsense.
As far as I'm concerned, it's not wrong for a man to bring a little experience to a
marriage. After all, it has nothing to do with the marriage itself, does it?
Soon after I turned eleven, they told me about menstruation. But even then, I had no
idea where the blood came from or what it was for. When I was twelve and a half, I
learned some more from Jacque, who wasn't as ignorant as I was. My own intuition
told me what a man and a woman do when they're together; it seemed like a crazy
idea at first, but when Jacque confirmed it, I was proud of myself for having figured it
out!
It was also Jacque who told me that children didn't come out of their mother's
tummies. As she put it, "Where the ingredients go in is where the finished product
comes out!" Jacque and I found out about the hymen, and quite a few other details,
from a book on sex education. I also knew that you could keep from having children,
but how that worked inside your body remained a mystery. When I came here, Father
told me about prostitutes, etc., but all in all there are still unanswered questions.
If mothers don't tell their children everything, they hear it in bits and pieces, and that
can't be right.
Even though it's Saturday, I'm not bored! That's because I've been up in the attic with
Peter. I sat there dreaming with my eyes closed, and it was wonderful.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
SUNDAY, MARCH 19, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Yesterday was a very important day for me. After lunch everything was as usual. At
five I put on the potatoes, and Mother gave me some blood sausage to take to Peter.
I didn't want to at first, but I finally went. He wouldn't accept the sausage, and I had
the dreadful feel- ing it was still because of that argument we'd had about distrust.
Suddenly I couldn't bear it a moment longer and my eyes filled with tears. Without
another word, I re- turned the platter to Mother and went to the bathroom to have a
good cry. Afterward I decided to talk things out with Peter. Before dinner the four of
us were helping him with a crossword puzzle, so I couldn't say anything. But as we
were sitting down to eat, I whispered to him, "Are you going to practice your
shorthand tonight, Peter?"
"No," was his reply.
"I'd like to talk to you later on."
He agreed.
After the dishes were done, I went to his room and asked if he'd refused the sausage
because of our last quar- rel. Luckily, that wasn't the reason; he just thought it was
bad manners to seem so eager. It had been very hot downstairs and my face was as
red as a lobster. So after taking down some water for Margot, I went back up to get
a little fresh air. For the sake of appearances, I first went and stood beside the van
Daans' window before going to Peter's room. He was standing on the left side of the
open window, so I went over to the right side. It's much easier to talk next to an
open window in semidarkness than in broad daylight, and I think Peter felt the same
way. We told each other so much, so very much, that I can't repeat it all. But it felt
good; it was the most won- derful evening I've ever had in the Annex. I'll give you a
brief description of the various subjects we touched on.
First we talked about the quarrels and how I see them in a very different light these
days, and then about how we've become alienated from our parents. I told Peter about
Mother and Father and Margot and myself. At one point he asked, "You always give
each other a good-night kiss, don't you?"
"One? Dozens of them. You don't, do you?"
"No, I've never really kissed anyone."
"Not even on your birthday?"
"Yeah, on my birthday I have."
We talked about how neither of us really trusts our parents, and how his parents love
each other a great deal and wish he'd confide in them, but that he doesn't want to.
How I cry my heart out in bed and he goes up to the loft and swears. How Margot
and I have only recently gotten to know each other and yet still tell each other very
little, since we're always together. We talked about every imaginable thing, about
trust, feelings and ourselves. Oh, Kitty, he was just as I thought he would be.
Then we talked about the year 1942, and how different we were back then; we don't
even recognize ourselves from that period. How we couldn't stand each other at first.
He'd thought I was a noisy pest, and I'd quickly concluded that he was nothing special.
I didn't understand why he didn't flirt with me, but now I'm glad. He also mentioned
how he often used to retreat to his room. I said that my noise and exuberance and his
silence were two sides of the same coin, and that I also liked peace and quiet but
don't have anything for myself alone, except my diary, and that everyone would rather
see the back of me, starting with Mr. Dussel, and that I don't always want to sit with
my parents. We discussed how glad he is that my parents have children and how glad
I am that he's here.
How I now understand his need to withdraw and his relationship to his parents, and
how much I'd like to help him when they argue.
"But you're always a help to me!" he said.
"How?" I asked, greatly surprised.
"By being cheerful."
That was the nicest thing he said all evening. He also told me that he didn't mind my
coming to his room the way he used to; in fact, he liked it. I also told him that all of
Father's and Mother's pet names were meaningless, that a kiss here and there didn't
automatically lead to trust. We also talked about doing things your own way, the diary,
loneliness, the difference between everyone's inner and outer selves, my mask, etc.
It was wonderful. He must have come to love me as a friend, and, for the time being,
that's enough. I'm so grateful and happy, I can't find the words. I must apolo- gize,
Kitty, since my style is not up to my usual standard today. I've just written whatever
came into my head!
I have the feeling that Peter and I share a secret. Whenever he looks at me with
those eyes, with that smile and that wink, it's as if a light goes on inside me. I hope
things will stay like this and that we'll have many, many more happy hours together.
Your grateful and happy Anne
MONDAY, MARCH 20, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
This morning Peter asked me if I'd come again one evening. He swore I wouldn't be
disturbing him, and said that where there was room for one, there was room for two.
I said I couldn't see him every evening, since my parents didn't think it was a good
idea, but he thought I shouldn't let that bother me. So I told him I'd like to come
some Saturday evening and also asked him if he'd let me know when you could see
the moon.
"Sure," he said, "maybe we can go downstairs and look at the moon from there." I
agreed; I'm not really so scared of burglars.
In the meantime, a shadow has fallen on my happiness. For a long time I've had the
feeling that Margot likes Peter. Just how much I don't know, but the whole situation is
very unpleasant. Now every time I go see Peter I'm hurting her, without meaning to.
The funny thing is that she hardly lets it show. I know I'd be insanely jealous, but
Margot just says I shouldn't feel sorry for her.
"I think it's so awful that you've become the odd one out," I added.
"I'm used to that," she replied, somewhat bitterly.
I don't dare tell Peter. Maybe later on, but he and I need to discuss so many other
things first.
Mother slapped me last night, which I deserved. I mustn't carry my indifference and
contempt for her too far. In spite of everything, I should try once again to be friendly
and keep my remarks to myself!
Even Pim isn't as nice as he used to be. He's been trying not to treat me like a child,
but now he's much too cold. We'll just have to see what comes of it! He's warned me
that if I don't do my algebra, I won't get any tutoring after the war. I could simply
wait and see what happens, but I'd like to start again, provided I get a new book.
That's enough for now. I do nothing but gaze at Peter, and I'm filled to overflowing!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
Evidence of Margot's goodness. I received this today, March 20, 1944:
Anne, yesterday when I said I wasn't jeal- ous of you, I wasn't being entirely honest.
The situation is this: I'm not jealous of either you or Peter. I'm just sorry I haven't
found anyone willi whom to share my thoughts and feelings, and I'm not likely to in
the near future. But that's why I wish, from the bottom of my heart, that you will
both be able to place your trust in each other. You're already missing out on so much
here, things other people take for granted.
On the other hand, I'm certain I'd never have gotten as far with Peter, because I think
I'd need to feel very close to a person before I could share my thoughts. I'd want to
have the feeling that he understood me through and through, even if I didn't say much.
For this reason it would have to be someone I felt was intellectually superior to me,
and that isn't the case with Peter. But I can imagine your feeling close to him.
So there's no need for you to reproach yourself because you think you' te taking
something I was entitled to; nothing could be further from the truth. You and Peter
have everything to gain by your friendship.
My answer:
Dearest Margot,
Your letter was extremely kind, but I still don't feel completely happy about the
situation, and I don't think I ever will.
At the moment, Peter and I don't trust each other as much as you seem to think. It's
just that when you're standing beside an open window at twthght, you can say more to
each other than in bright sunshine. It's also easier to whisper your feelings than to
shout them from the rooftops. I think you've begun to feel a kind of sisterly affection
for Peter and would like to help him, just as much as I would. Perhaps you'll be able
to do that someday, though that's not the kind of trust we have in mind. I believe that
trust has to corne from both sides; I also think that's the reason why Father and I
have never really grown so close. But let's not talk about it anymore. If there's
anything you still want to discuss, please write, because it's easier for me to say what
I mean as on paper than face-to-face. You know how le much I admire you, and only
hope that some of your goodness and Father's goodness will rub off on me, because,
in that sense, you two are a lot alike.
Yours, Anne
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 22,1944
Dearest Kitty,
I received this letter last night from Margot:
Dear Anne,
After your letter of yesterday I have the unpleasant feeling that your conscience
bothers you whenever you go to Peter's to work or talk; there's really no reason for
that. In my heart, I know there's someone who deserves t my trust (as I do his), and
I wouldn't be able to tolerate Peter in his place.
However, as you wrote, I do think of Peter as a kind of brother. . . a younger
brother; we've been sending out feelers, and a brotherly and sisterly affection mayor
may not develop at some later date, but it's certainly not reached that stage yet. So
there's no need for you to feel sorry for me. Now that you've found companionship,
enjoy it as much as you can.
In the meantime, things are getting more and more wonderful here. I think, Kitty, that
true love may be developing in the Annex. All those jokes about marrying Peter if we
stayed here long enough weren't so silly after all. Not that I'm thinking of marrying
him, mind you. I don't even know what he'll be like when he grows up. Or if we'll
even love each other enough to get married.
I'm sure now that Peter loves me too; I just don't know in what way. I can't figure
out if he wants only a good friend, or if he's attracted to me as a girl or as a sister.
When he said I always helped him when his parents were arguing, I was tremendously
happy; it was one step toward making me believe in his friendship. I asked him
yesterday what he'd do if there were a dozen Annes who kept popping in to see him.
His answer was: "If they were all like you, it wouldn't be so bad." He's extremely
hospitable, and I think he really likes to see me. Mean- while, he's been working hard
at learning French, even studying in bed until ten-fifteen.
Oh, when I think back to Saturday night, to our words, our voices, I feel satisfied with
myself for the very first time; what I mean is, I'd still say the same and wouldn't
want to change a thing, the way I usually do. He's so handsome, whether he's smthng
or just sitting still. He's so sweet and good and beautiful. I think what surprised him
most about me was when he discovered that I'm not at all the superficial, worldly
Anne I appear to be, but a dreamer, like he is, with just as many troubles!
Last night after the dinner dishes, I waited for him to ask me to stay upstairs. But
nothing happened; I went away. He came downstairs to tell Dussel it was time to
listen to the radio and hung around the bathroom for a while, but when Dussel took
too long, he went back upstairs. He paced up and down his room and went to bed
early.
The entire evening I was so restless I kept going to the bathroom to splash cold
water on my face. I read a bit, daydreamed some more, looked at the clock and
waited, waited, waited, all the while listening to his foot- steps. I went to bed early,
exhausted.
Tonight I have to take a bath, and tomorrow?
Tomorrow's so far away!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
My answer:
Dearest Margot,
I think the best thing is simply to wait and see what happens. It can't be much longer
before Peter and I will have to decide whether to go back to the way we were or do
some- thing else. I don't know how it'll turn out; I can't see any farther than the end
of my nose.
But I'm certain of one thing: if Peter and I do become friends, I'm going to tell him
you're also very fond of him and are prepared to help him if he needs you. You
wouldn't want me to, I'm sure, but I don't care; I don't know what Peter thinks of
you, but I'll ask him when the time comes. It's certainly nothing bad -- on the
contrary! You're welcome to join us in the attic, or wherever we are. You won't be
disturbing us, because we have an unspoken agreement to talk only in the evenings
when it's dark.
Keep your spirits up! I'm doing my best, though it's not always easy. Your time may
come sooner than you think.
Yours, Anne
THURSDAY, MARCH 23, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Things are more or less back to normal here. Our coupon men have been released
from prison, thank goodness!
Miep's been back since yesterday, but today it was her husband's turn to take to his
bed-chills and fever, the usual flu symptoms. Bep is better, though she still has a
cough, and Mr. Kleiman will have to stay home for a long time.
Yesterday a plane crashed nearby. The crew was able to parachute out in time. It
crashed on top of a school, but luckily there were no children inside. There was a
small fire and a couple of people were killed. As the airmen made their descent, the
Germans sprayed them with bullets. The Amsterdammers who saw it seethed with
rage at such a dastardly deed. We-by which I mean the ladies-were also scared out
of our wits. Brrr, I hate the sound of gunfire.
Now about myself.
I was with Peter yesterday and, somehow, I honestly don't know how, we wound up
talking about sex. I'd made up my mind a long time ago to ask him a few things. He
knows everything; when I said that Margot and I weren't very well informed, he was
amazed. I told him a lot about Margot and me and Mother and Father and said that
lately I didn't dare ask them anything. He offered to enlighten me, and I gratefully
accepted: he described how contraceptives work, and I asked him very boldly how
boys could tell they were grown up. He had to think about that one; he said he'd tell
me tonight. I told him what had happened to Jacque, and said that girls are
defenseless against strong boys. "Well, you don't have to be afraid of me," he said.
When I came back that evening, he told me how it is with boys. Slightly embarrassing,
but still awfully nice to be able to discuss it with him. Neither he nor I had ever
imagined we'd be able to talk so openly to a girl or a boy, respectively, about such
intimate matters. I think I know everything now. He told me a lot about what he
called Prasentivmitteln* [* Should be Praservativmitteln: prophylactics] in German.
That night in the bathroom Margot and I were talking about Bram and Trees, two
friends of hers.
This morning I was in for a nasty surprise: after breakfast Peter beckoned me
upstairs. "That was a dirty trick you played on me," he said. "I heard what you and
Margot were saying in the bathroom last night. I think you just wanted to find out
how much Peter knew and then have a good laugh!"
I was stunned! I did everything I could to talk him out of that outrageous idea; I
could understand how he must have felt, but it just wasn't true!
"Oh no, Peter," I said. "I'd never be so mean. I told you I wouldn't pass on anything
you said to me and I won't. To put on an act like that and then deliberately be so
mean. . . No,Peter, that's not my idea ofa joke.
It wouldn't be fair. I didn't say anything, honest. Won't you believe me?" He assured
me he did, but I think we'll have to talk about it again sometime. I've done nothing all
day but worry about it. Thank goodness he came right out and said what was on his
mind. Imagine if he'd gone around thinking I could be that mean. He's so sweet!
Now I'll have to tell him everything!
Yours, Anne
FRIDAY, MARCH 24, 1944
Dear Kitty,
I often go up to Peter's room after dinner nowadays to breathe in the fresh evening
air. You can get around to meaningful conversations more quickly in the dark than with
the sun tickling your face. It's cozy and snug sitting beside him on a chair and looking
outside. The van Daans and Dussel make the silliest remarks when I disappear into his
room. "Annes zweite Heimat,"* [* Anne's second home] they say, or "Is it proper for
a gentleman to receive young girls in his room at night with the lights out?" Peter has
amazing presence of mind in the face of these so-called witticisms. My mother,
incidentally, is also bursting with curiosity and simply dying to ask what we talk
about, only she's secretly afraid I'd refuse to answer. Peter says the grown-ups are
just jealous because we're young and that we shouldn't take their obnoxious comments
to heart.
Sometimes he comes downstairs to get me, but that's awkward too, because in spite
of all his precautions his face turns bright red and he can hardly get the words out of
his mouth. I'm glad I don't blush; it must be extremely unpleasant.
Besides, it bothers me that Margot has to sit downstairs all by herself, while I'm
upstairs enjoying Peter's company. But what can I do about it? I wouldn't mind it if
she came, but she'd just be the odd one out, sitting there like a lump on a log.
I've had to listen to countless remarks about our sudden friendship. I can't tell you
how often the conversation at meals has been about an Annex wedding, should the war
last another five years. Do we take any notice of this parental chitchat? Hardly, since
it's all so silly. Have my parents forgotten that they were young once? Apparently
they have. At any rate, they laugh at us when we're serious, and they're serious when
we're joking.
I don't know what's going to happen next, or whether we'll run out of things to say.
But if it goes on like this, we'll eventually be able to be together without talking. If
only his parents would stop acting so strangely. It's probably because they don't like
seeing me so often; Peter and I certainly never tell them what we talk about. Imagine
if they knew we were discussing such intimate things.
I'd like to ask Peter whether he knows what girls look like down there. I don't think
boys are as complicated as girls. You can easily see what boys look like in
photographs or pictures of male nudes, but with women it's different. In women, the
genitals, or whatever they're called, are hidden between their legs. Peter has probably
never seen a girl up close. To tell you the truth, neither have I. Boys are a lot easier.
How on earth would I go about describing a girl's parts? I can tell from what he said
that he doesn't know exactly how it all fits together. He was talking about the
"Muttermund," [* cervix], but that's on the inside, where you can't see it. Everything's
pretty well arranged in us women. Until I was eleven or twelve, I didn't realize there
was a second set of labia on the inside, since you couldn't see them. What's even
funnier is that I thought urine came out of the clitoris. I asked Mother one time what
that little bump was, and she said she didn't know. She can really play dumb when
she wants to!
But to get back to the subject. How on earth can you explain what it all looks like
without any models?
Shall I try anyway? Okay, here goes!
When you're standing up, all you see from the front is hair. Between your legs there
are two soft, cushiony things, also covered with hair, which press together when
you're standing, so you can't see what's inside. They separate when you sit down, and
they're very red and quite fleshy on the inside. In the upper part, between the outer
labia, there's a fold of skin that, on second thought, looks like a kind of blister. That's
the clitoris. Then come the inner labia, which are also pressed together in a kind of
crease. When they open up, you can see a fleshy little mound, no bigger than the top
of my thumb. The upper part has a couple of small holes in it, which is where the
urine comes out. The lower part looks as if it were just skin, and yet that's where
the vagina is. You can barely find it, because the folds of skin hide the opening. The
hole's so small I can hardly imagine how a man could get in there, much less how a
baby could come out. It's hard enough trying to get your index finger inside. That's all
there is, and yet it plays such an important role!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
SATURDAY, MARCH 25, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
You never realize how much you've changed until after it's happened. I've changed
quite drastically, everything about me is different: my opinions, ideas, critical outlook.
Inwardly, outwardly, nothing's the same. And, I might safely add, since it's true, I've
changed for the better. I once told you that, after years of being adored, it was hard
for me to adjust to the harsh reality of grown-ups and rebukes. But Father and
Mother are largely to blame for my having to put up with so much. At home they
wanted me to enjoy life, which was fine, but here they shouldn't have encouraged me
to agree with them and only shown me "their" side of all the quarrels and gossip. It
was a long time before I discovered the score was fifty-fifty. I now know that many
blunders have been committed here, by young and old alike. Father and Mother's
biggest mistake in dealing with the van Daans is that they're never candid and friendly
(admittedly, the friendliness might have to be feigned). Above all, I want to keep the
peace, and to neither quarrel nor gossip. With Father and Margot that's not difficult,
but it is with Mother, which is why I'm glad she gives me an occasional rap on the
knuckles. You can win Mr. van Daan to your side by agreeing with him, listening
quietly, not saying much and most of all . . . responding to his teasing and his corny
jokes with a joke of your own. Mrs. van D. can be won over by talking openly to her
and admitting when you're wrong. She also frankly admits her faults, of which she has
many. I know all too well that she doesn't think as badly of me as she did in the
beginning. And that's simply because I'm honest and tell people right to their faces
what I think, even when it's not very flattering. I want to be honest; I think it gets
you further and also makes you feel better about yourself.
Yesterday Mrs. van D. was talking about the rice we gave Mr. Kleiman. "All we do is
give, give, give. But at a certain point I think that enough is enough. If he'd only take
the trouble, Mr. Kleiman could scrounge up his own rice. Why should we give away all
our supplies? We need them just as badly."
"No, Mrs. van Daan," I replied. "I don't agree with you. Mr. Kleiman may very well be
able to get hold of a little rice, but he doesn't like having to worry about it. It's not
our place to criticize the people who are helping us. We should give them whatever
they need if we can possibly spare it. One less plate of rice a week won't make that
much difference; we can always eat beans."
Mrs. van D. didn't see it my way, but she added that, even though she disagreed, she
was willing to back down, and that was an entirely different matter.
Well, I've said enough. Sometimes I know what my place is and sometimes I have my
doubts, but I'll eventually get where I want to be! I know I will! Especially now that I
have help, since Peter helps me through many a rough patch and rainy day!
I honestly don't know how much he loves me and whether we'll ever get as far as a
kiss; in any case, I don't want to force the issue! I told Father I often go see Peter
and asked if he approved, and of course he did!
It's much easier now to tell Peter things I'd nor- mally keep to myself; for example,
I told him I want to write later on, and if I can't be a writer, to write in addition to
my work.
I don't have much in the way of money or worldly possessions, I'm not beautiful,
intelligent or clever, but I'm happy, and I intend to stay that way! I was born happy, I
love people, I have a trusting nature, and I'd like everyone else to be happy too.
Your devoted friend, Anne M. Frank
An empty day, though clear and bright,
Is just as dark as any night.
(I wrote this a few weeks ago and it no longer holds true, but I included it because
my poems are so few and far between.)
MONDAY, MARCH 27, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
At least one long chapter on our life in hiding should be about politics, but I've been
avoiding the subject, since it interests me so little. Today, however, I'll devote an
entire letter to politics.
Of course, there are many different opinions on this topic, and it's not surprising to
hear it frequently discussed in times of war, but. . . arguing so much about politics is
just plain stupid! Let them laugh, swear, make bets, grumble and do whatever they
want as long as they stew in their own juice. But don't let them argue, since that only
makes things worse. The people who come from outside bring us a lot of news that
later proves to be untrue; however, up to now our radio has never lied. Jan, Miep, Mr.
Kleiman, Bep and Mr. Kugler go up and down in their political moods, though Jan least
of all.
Here in the Annex the mood never varies. The end- less debates over the invasion,
air raids, speeches, etc., etc., are accompanied by countless exclamations such as
"Eempossible!, Urn Gottes Willen* [* Oh, for heaven's sake]. If they're just getting
started now, how long is it going to last!, It's going splendidly, But, great!"
Optimists and pessimists -- not to mention the realists -- air their opinions with
unflagging energy, and as with everything else, they're all certain that they have a
monopoly on the truth. It annoys a certain lady that her spouse has such supreme
faith in the British, and a certain husband attacks his wife because of her teasing and
dispar- aging remarks about his beloved nation!
And so it goes from early in the morning to late at night; the funny part is that they
never get tired of it. I've discovered a trick, and the effect is overwhelming, just like
pricking someone with a pin and watching them jump. Here's how it works: I start
talking about politics.
All it takes is a single question, a word or a sentence, and before you know it, the
entire family is involved!
As if the German "Wehrmacht News" and the English BBC weren't enough, they've
now added special air-raid announcements. In a word, splendid. But the other side of
the coin is that the British Air Force is operating around the clock. Not unlike the
German propaganda machine, which is cranking out lies twenty-four hours a day!
So the radio is switched on every morning at eight (if not earlier) and is listened to
every hour until nine, ten or even eleven at night. This is the best evidence yet that
the adults have infinite patience, but also that their brains have turned to mush (some
of them, I mean, since I wouldn't want to insult anyone). One broadcast, two at the
most, should be enough to last the entire day. But no, those old nincompoops. . .
never mind, I've already said it all! "Music While You Work," the Dutch broadcast
from England, Frank Phillips or Queen Wilhelmina, they each get a turn and fInd a
willing listener. If the adults aren't eating or sleeping, they're clustered around the
radio talking about eating, sleeping and politics. Whew! It's getting to be a bore, and
it's all I can do to keep from turning into a dreary old crone myself! Though with all
the old folks around me, that might not be such a bad idea!
Here's a shining example, a speech made by our beloved Winston Churchill.
Nine o'clock, Sunday evening. The teapot, under its cozy, is on the table, and the
guests enter the room.
Dussel sits to the left of the radio, Mr. van D. in front of it and Peter to the side.
Mother is next to Mr. van D., willi Mrs. van D. behind them. Margot and I are sitting
in the last row and Pim at the table. I realize this isn't a very clear description of our
seating arrangements, but it doesn't matter. The men smoke, Peter's eyes close from
the strain of listening, Mama is dressed in her long, dark negligee, Mrs. van D. is
trembling because of the planes, which take no notice of the speech but fly blithely on
toward Essen, Father is slurping his tea, and Margot and I are united in a sisterly way
by the sleeping Mouschi, who has taken possession of both our knees. Margot's hair is
in curlers and my nightgown is too small, too tight and too short. It all looks so
intimate, cozy and peaceful, and for once it really is. Yet I await the end of the
speech willi dread. They're impatient, straining at the leash to start another argument!
Pst, pst, like a cat luring a mouse from its hole, they goad each other into quarrels
and dissent.
Yours, Anne
TUESDAY, MARCH 28, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
As much as I'd like to write more on politics, I have lots of other news to report
today. First, Mother has virtually forbidden me to go up to Peter's, since, according to
her, Mrs. van Daan is jealous. Second, Peter's invited Margot to join us upstairs.
Whether he really means it or is just saying it out of politeness, I don't know. Third,
I asked Father if he thought I should take any notice of Mrs. van Daan's jealousy and
he said I didn't have to.
What should I do now? Mother's angry, doesn't want me going upstairs, wants me to
go back to doing my homework in the room I share willi Dussel. She may be jealous
herself. Father doesn't begrudge us those few hours and thinks it's nice we get along
so well. Margot likes Peter too, but feels that three people can't talk about the same
things as two.
Furthermore, Mother thinks Peter's in love with me. To tell you the truth, I wish he
were. Then we'd be even, and it'd be a lot easier to get to know each other. She also
claims he's always looking at me. Well, I suppose we do give each other the
occasional wink. But I can't help it if he keeps admiring my dimples, can I?
I'm in a very difficult position. Mother's against me and I'm against her. Father turns a
blind eye to the silent struggle between Mother and me. Mother is sad, because she
still loves me, but I'm not at all unhappy, because she no longer means anything to
me.
As for Peter. . . I don't want to give him up. He's so sweet and I admire him so
much. He and I could have a really beautiful relationship, so why are the old folks
poking their noses into our business again? Fortu- nately, I'm used to hiding my
feelings, so I manage not to show how crazy I am about him. Is he ever going to say
anything? Am I ever going to feel his cheek against mine, the way I felt Petel's cheek
in my dream? Oh, Peter and
Petel, you're one and the same! They don't understand us; they'd never understand
that we're content just to sit beside each other and not say a word. They have no
idea of what draws us together! Oh, when will we overcome all these difficulties? And
yet it's good that we have to surmount them, since it makes the end that much more
beautiful. When he lays his head on his arms and closes his eyes, he's still a child;
when he plays with Mouschi or talks about her, he's loving; when he carries the
potatoes or other heavy loads, he's strong; when he goes to watch the gunfire or
walks through the dark house to look for burglars, he's brave; and when he's so
awkward and clumsy, he's hopelessly endearing. It's much nicer when he explains
something to me than when I have to teach him. I wish he were superior to me in
nearly every way!
What do we care about our two mothers? Oh, if only he'd say something.
Father always says I'm conceited, but I'm not, I'm merely vain! I haven't had many
people tell me I was pretty, except for a boy at school who said I looked so cute
when I smiled. Yesterday Peter paid me a true com- pliment, and just for fun I'll give
you a rough idea of our conversation.
Peter often says, "Smile!" I thought it was strange, so yesterday I asked him, "Why
do you always want me to smile?"
"Because you get dimples in your cheeks. How do you do that?"
"I was born with them. There's also one in my chin. It's the only mark of beauty I
possess."
"No, no, that's not true!"
"Yes it is. I know I'm not beautiful. I never have been and I never will be!"
"I don't agree. I think you're pretty."
"I am not."
"I say you are, and you'll have to take my word for it." So of course I then said the
same about him.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 29, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Mr. Bolkestein, the Cabinet Minister, speaking on the Dutch broadcast from London,
said that after the war a collection would be made of diaries and letters dealing with
the war. Of course, everyone pounced on my diary. Just imagine how interesting it
would be if I were to publish a novel about the Secret Annex. The title alone would
make people think it was a detective story.
Seriously, though, ten years after the war people would find it very amusing to read
how we lived, what we ate and what we talked about as Jews in hiding. Although I
tell you a great deal about our lives, you still know very little about us. How
frightened the women are during air raids; last Sunday, for instance, when 350 British
planes dropped 550 tons of bombs on IJmuiden, so that the houses trembled like
blades of grass in the wind. Or how many epidemics are raging here.
You know nothing of these matters, and it would take me all day to describe
everything down to the last detail. People have to stand in line to buy vegetables and
all kinds of goods; doctors can't visit their patients, since their cars and bikes are
stolen the moment they turn their backs; burglaries and thefts are so common that you
ask yourself what's suddenly gotten into the Dutch to make them so light-fingered.
Little children, eight- and eleven- year-olds, smash the windows of people's homes
and steal whatever they can lay their hands on. People don't dare leave the house for
even five minutes, since they're liable to come back and find all their belongings gone.
Every day the newspapers are filled with reward notices for the return of stolen
typewriters, Persian rugs, electric clocks, fabrics, etc. The electric clocks on street
corners are dismantled, public phones are stripped down to the last wire.
Morale among the Dutch can't be good. Everyone's hungry; except for the ersatz
coffee, a week's food ration doesn't last two days. The invasion's long in coming, the
men are being shipped off to Germany, the children are sick or undernourished,
everyone's wearing worn-out clothes and run-down shoes. A new sole costs 7.50
guil- ders on the black market. Besides, few shoemakers will do repairs, or if they
do, you have to wait four months for your shoes, which might very well have
disappeared in the meantime.
One good thing has come out of this: as the food gets worse and the decrees more
severe, the acts of sabo- tage against the authorities are increasing. The ration board,
the police, the officials-they're all either helping their fellow citizens or denouncing
them and sending them off to prison. Fortunately, only a small percentage of Dutch
people are on the wrong side.
Yours, Anne
FRIDAY, MARCH 31, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Just imagine, it's still fairly cold, and yet most people have been without coal for
nearly a month. Sounds awful, doesn't it? There's a general mood of optimism about
the Russian front, because that's going great guns! I don't often write about the
political situation, but I must tell you where the Russians are at the moment. They've
reached the Polish border and the Prut River in Romania. They're close to Odessa, and
they've surrounded Ternopol. Every night we're expecting an extra communique from
Stalin.
They're firing off so many salutes in Moscow, the city must be rumbling and shaking
all day long. Whether they like to pretend the fighting's nearby or they simply don't
have any other way to express their joy, I don't know!
Hungary has been occupied by German troops.
There are still a million Jews living there; they too are doomed.
Nothing special is happening here. Today is Mr. van Daan's birthday. He received two
packets of tobacco, one serving of coffee, which his wife had managed to save, lemon
punch from Mr. Kugler, sardines from Miep, eau de cologne from us, lilacs, tulips and,
last but not least, a cake with raspberry filling, slightly gluey because of the poor
quality of the flour and the lack of butter, but deli- cious anyway.
All that talk about Peter and me has died down a bit. He's coming to pick me up
tonight. Pretty nice of him, don't you think, since he hates doing it! We're very good
friends. We spend a lot of time together and talk about every imaginable subject. It's
so nice not having to hold back when we come to a delicate topic, the way I would
with other boys. For example, we were talking about blood and somehow the
conversation turned to menstruation, etc. He thinks we women are quite tough to be
able to withstand the loss of blood, and that I am too. I wonder why?
My life here has gotten better, much better. God has not forsaken me, and He never
will.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
SATURDAY, APRIL 1, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
And yet everything is still so difficult. You do know what I mean, don't you? I long so
much for him to kiss me, but that kiss is taking its own sweet time. Does he still
think of me as a friend? Don't I mean anything more?
You and I both know that I'm strong, that I can carry most burdens alone. I've never
been used to sharing my worries with anyone, and I've never clung to a mother, but
I'd love to lay my head on his shoulder and just sit there quietly.
I can't, I simply can't forget that dream of Peter's cheek, when everything was so
good! Does he have the same longing? Is he just too shy to say he loves me? Why
does he want me near him so much? Oh, why doesn't he say something?
I've got to stop, I've got to be calm. I'll try to be strong again, and if I'm patient, the
rest will follow. But -- and this is the worst part -- I seem to be chasing him. I'm
always the one who has to go upstairs; he never comes to me. But that's because of
the rooms, and he understands why I object. Oh, I'm sure he understands more than I
think .
Yours, Anne M. Frank
MONDAY, APRIL 3, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
Contrary to my usual practice, I'm going to write you a detailed description of the
food situation, since it's become a matter of some difficulty and importance, not only
here in the Annex, but in all of Holland, all of Europe and even beyond.
In the twenty-one months we've lived here, we've been through a good many "food
cycles" -- you'll understand what that means in a moment. A "food cycle" is a period
in which we have only one particular dish or type of vegetable to eat. For a long time
we ate nothing but endive. Endive with sand, endive without sand, endive with mashed
potatoes, endive-and-mashed potato casserole. Then it was spinach, followed by
kohlrabi, salsify, cucumbers, tomatoes, sauerkraut, etc., etc.
It's not much fun when you have to eat, say, sauer- kraut every day for lunch and
dinner, but when you're hungry enough, you do a lot of things. Now, however, we're
going through the most delightful period so far, because there are no vegetables at all.
Our weekly lunch menu consists of brown beans, split-pea soup, potatoes with
dumplings, potato kugel and, by the grace of God, turnip greens or rotten carrots, and
then it's back to brown beans. Because of the bread shortage, we eat potatoes at
every meal, starting with breakfast, but then we fry them a little. To make soup we
use brown beans, navy beans, potatoes, packages of vege- table soup, packages of
chicken soup and packages of bean soup. There are brown beans in everything,
including the bread. For dinner we always have potatoes with imitation gravy and --
thank goodness we've still got it -- beet salad. I must tell you about the dumplings.
We make them with government-issue flour, water and yeast. They're so gluey and
tough that it feels as if you had rocks in your stomach, but oh well!
The high point is our weekly slice of liverwurst, and the jam on our unbuttered bread.
But we're still alive, and much of the time it still tastes good too!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 5, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
For a long time now I didn't know why I was bothering to do any schoolwork. The
end of the war still seemed so far away, so unreal, like a fairy tale. If the war isn't
over by September, I won't go back to school, since I don't want to be two years
behind.
Peter filled my days, nothing but Peter, dreams and thoughts until Saturday night,
when I felt so utterly miserable; oh, it was awful. I held back my tears when I was
with Peter, laughed uproariously with the van Daans as we drank lemon punch and was
cheerful and excited, but the minute I was alone I knew I was going to cry my eyes
out. I slid to the floor in my nightgown and began by saying my prayers, very
fervently. Then I drew my knees to my chest, lay my head on my arms and cried, all
huddled up on the bare floor. A loud sob brought me back down to earth, and I choked
back my tears, since I didn't want anyone next door to hear me. Then I tried to pull
myself together, saying over and over, "I must, I must, I must. . . " Stiff from sitting
in such an unusual position, I fell back against the side of the bed and kept up my
struggle until just before ten-thirty, when I climbed back into bed. It was over!
And now it's really over. I finally realized that I must do my schoolwork to keep from
being ignorant, to get on in life, to become a journalist, because that's what I want! I
know I can write. A few of my stories are good, my descriptions of the Secret Annex
are humorous, much of my diary is vivid and alive, but. . . it remains to be seen
whether I really have talent.
"Eva's Dream" is my best fairy tale, and the odd thing is that I don't have the faintest
idea where it came from. Parts of "Cady's Life" are also good, but as a whole it's
nothing special. I'm my best and harshest critic. I know what's good and what isn't.
Unless you write yourself, you can't know how wonderful it is; I always used to
bemoan the fact that I couldn't draw, but now I'm overjoyed that at least I can write.
And if I don't have the talent to write books or newspaper articles, I can always write
for myself. But I want to achieve more than that. I can't imagine having to live like
Mother, Mrs. van Daan and all the women who go about their work and are then
forgotten. I need to have something besides a husband and children to devote myself
to! I don't want to have lived in vain like most people. I want to be useful or bring
enjoyment to all people, even those I've never met. I want to go on living even after
my death! And that's why I'm so grateful to God for having given me this gift, which
I can use to develop myself and to express all that's inside me!
When I write I can shake off all my cares. My sor- row disappears, my spirits are
revived! But, and that's a big question, will I ever be able to write something great,
will I ever become a journalist or a writer?
I hope so, oh, I hope so very much, because writing allows me to record everything,
all my thoughts, ideals and fantasies.
I haven't worked on "Cady's Life" for ages. In my mind I've worked out exactly what
happens next, but the story doesn't seem to be coming along very well. I might never
finish it, and it'll wind up in the wastepaper basket or the stove. That's a horrible
thought, but then I say to myself, "At the age of fourteen and with so little
experience, you can't write about philosophy."
So onward and upward, with renewed spirits. It'll all work out, because I'm determined
to write!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
THURSDAY, APRIL 6, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
You asked me what my hobbies and interests are and I'd like to answer, but I'd better
warn you, I have lots of them, so don't be surprised.
First of all: writing, but I don't really think of that as a hobby.
Number two: genealogical charts. I'm looking in every newspaper, book and document I
can find for the family trees of the French, German, Spanish, English, Austrian,
Russian, Norwegian and Dutch royal famthes. I've made great progress with many of
them, because for ! a long time I've been taking notes while reading biogra- I, phies
or history books. I even copy out many of the passages on history.
So my third hobby is history, and Father's already bought me numerous books. I can
hardly wait for the day when I'll be able to go to the public library and ferret out Iii
the information I need.
Number four is Greek and Roman mythology. I have various books on this subject too.
I can name the nine Muses and the seven loves of Zeus. I have the wives of
Hercules, etc., etc., down pat.
My other hobbies are movie stars and family photographs. I'm crazy about reading and
books. I adore the history of the arts, especially when it concerns writers, poets and
painters; musicians may come later. I loathe algebra, geometry and arithmetic. I enjoy
all my other school subjects, but history's my favorite!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
TUESDAY, APRIL 11, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
My head's in a whirl, I really don't know where to begin. Thursday (the last time I
wrote you) everything was as usual. Friday afternoon (Good Friday) we played
Monopoly; Saturday afternoon too. The days passed very quickly. Around two o'clock
on Saturday, heavy firing ii began-machine guns, according to the men. For the rest,
everything was quiet.
Sunday afternoon Peter came to see me at four-thirty, at my invitation. At
five-fifteen we went to the Ii front attic, where we stayed until six. There was a
beautil ful Mozart concert on the radio from six to seven-fifteen; I especially enjoyed
the Kleine Nachtmusik. I can hardly bear to listen in the kitchen, since beautiful music
stirs me to the very depths of my soul. Sunday evening Peter couldn't take his balli,
because the washtub was down in the office kitchen, filled with laundry. The two of
us went to the front attic together, and in order to be able to sit comfortably, I took
along the only cushion I could find in my room. We seated ourselves on a packing
crate. Since both the crate and the cushion were very narrow, we were sitting quite
close, leaning against two other crates; Mouschi kept us company, so we weren't
without a chaperon. Suddenly, at a quarter to nine, Mr. van Daan whistled and asked if
we had Mr. Dussel's cushion. We jumped up and went downstairs willi the cushion, the
cat and Mr. van Daan. This cushion was the source of much misery. Dussel was angry
because I'd taken the one he uses as a pillow, and he was afraid it might be covered
with fleas; he had the entire house in an uproar because of this one cushion. In
revenge, Peter and I stuck two hard brushes in his bed, but had to take them out
again when Dussel unexpectedly decided to go sit in his room. We had a really good
laugh at this little intermezzo.
But our fun was short-lived. At nine-thirty Peter knocked gently on the door and
asked Father to come upstairs and help him with a difficult English sentence.
"That sounds fishy," I said to Margot. "It's obviously a pretext. You can tell by the
way the men are talking that there's been a break-in!" I was right. The warehouse
was being broken into at that very moment. Father, Mr. van Daan and Peter were
downstairs in a flash. Margot, Mother, Mrs. van D. and I waited. Four frightened
women need to talk, so that's what we did until we heard a bang downstairs. After
that all was quiet. The clock struck quarter to ten. The color had drained from our
faces, but we remained calm, even though we were afraid. Where were the men? What
was that bang? Were they fighting with the burglars? We were too scared to think; all
we could do was wait.
Ten o'clock, footsteps on the stairs. Father, pale and nervous, came inside, followed
by Mr. van Daan. "Lights out, tiptoe upstairs, we're expecting the police!" There
wasn't time to be scared. The lights were switched off, I grabbed a jacket, and we sat
down upstairs.
"What happened? Tell us quickly!"
There was no one to tell us; the men had gone back downstairs. The four of them
didn't come back up until ten past ten. Two of them kept watch at Peter's open
window. The door to the landing was locked, the book- case shut. We draped a
sweater over our night-light, and then they told us what had happened:
Peter was on the landing when he heard two loud bangs. He went downstairs and saw
that a large panel was missing from the left half of the warehouse door. He dashed
upstairs, alerted the "Home Guard," and the four of them went downstairs. When they
entered the warehouse, the burglars were going about their business. Without thinking,
Mr. van Daan yelled "Police!" Hur- ried footsteps outside; the burglars had fled. The
board was put back in the door so the police wouldn't notice the gap, but then a swift
kick from outside sent it flying to the floor. The men were amazed at the burglars'
audacity. Both Peter and Mr. van Daan felt a murderous rage come over them. Mr. van
Daan slammed an ax against the floor, and all was quiet again. Once more the panel
was re- placed, and once more the attempt was foiled. Outside, a man and a woman
shone a glaring flashlight through the opening, lighting up the entire warehouse. "What
the . . ." mumbled one of the men, but now their roles had been reversed. Instead of
policemen, they were now burglars. All four of them raced upstairs. Dussel and Mr.
van Daan snatched up Dussel's books, Peter opened the doors and windows in the
kitchen and private office, hurled the phone to the ground, and the four of them finally
ended up behind the bookcase.
END OF PART ONE
In all probability the man and woman with the flashlight had alerted the police. It was
Sunday night, Easter Sunday. The next day, Easter Monday, the office was going to
be closed, which meant we wouldn't be able to move around until Tuesday morning.
Think of it, having to sit in such terror for a day and two nights! We thought of
nothing, but simply sat there in pitch darkness -- in her fear, Mrs. van D. had
switched off the lamp. We whispered, and every time we heard a creak, someone said,
"Shh, shh."
It was ten-thirty, then eleven. Not a sound. Father and Mr. van Daan took turns
coming upstairs to us. Then, at eleven-fifteen, a noise below. Up above you could
hear the whole family breathing. For the rest, no one moved a muscle. Footsteps in
the house, the private office, the kitchen, then. . . on the staircase. All sounds of
breathing stopped, eight hearts pounded. Foot- steps on the stairs, then a rattling at
the bookcase. This moment is indescribable.
"Now we're done for," I said, and I had visions of all fifteen of us being dragged away
by the Gestapo that very night.
More rattling at the bookcase, twice. Then we heard a can fall, and the footsteps
receded. We were out of danger, so far! A shiver went though everyone's body, I
heard several sets of teeth chattering, no one said a word. We stayed like this until
eleven-thirty.
There were no more sounds in the house, but a light was shining on our landing, right
in front of the bookcase. Was that because the police thought it looked so suspicious
or because they simply forgot? Was anyone going to come back and turn it off? We
found our tongues again.
There were no longer any people inside the building, but perhaps someone was
standing guard outside. We then did three things: tried to guess what was going on,
trembled with fear and went to the bathroom. Since the buckets were in the attic, all
we had was Peter's metal wastepaper basket. Mr. van Daan went first, then Father,
but Mother was too embarrassed. Father brought the waste- basket to the next room,
where Margot, Mrs. van Daan and I gratefully made use of it. Mother finally gave in.
There was a great demand for paper, and luckily I had some in my pocket.
The wastebasket stank, everything went on in a whisper, and we were exhausted. It
was midnight.
"Lie down on the floor and go to sleep!" Margot and I were each given a pillow and a
blanket. Margot lay down near the food cupboard, and I made my bed between the
table legs. The smell wasn't quite so bad when you were lying on the floor, but Mrs.
van Daan quietly went and got some powdered bleach and draped a dish towel over
the potty as a further precaution.
Talk, whispers, fear, stench, farting and people continually going to the bathroom; try
sleeping through that! By two-thirty, however, I was so tired I dozed off and didn't
hear a thing until three-thirty. I woke up when Mrs. van D. lay her head on my feet.
"For heaven's sake, give me something to put on!" I said. I was handed some clothes,
but don't ask what: a pair of wool slacks over my pajamas, a red sweater and a black
skirt, white understockings and tattered kneesocks.
Mrs. van D. sat back down on the chair, and Mr. van D. lay down with his head on
my feet. From three- thirty onward I was engrossed in thought, and still shiver- ing
so much that Mr. van Daan couldn't sleep. I was preparing myself for the return of
the police. We'd tell them we were in hiding; if they were good people, we'd be safe,
and if they were Nazi sympathizers, we could try to bribe them!
"We should hide the radio!" moaned Mrs. van D.
"Sure, in the stove," answered Mr. van D. "If they find us, they might as well find the
radio!"
"Then they'll also find Anne's diary," added Father.
"So burn it," suggested the most terrified of the group.
This and the police rattling on the bookcase were the moments when I was most
afraid. Oh, not my diary; if my diary goes, I go too! Thank goodness Father didn't say
anything more.
There's no point in recounting all the conversations; so much was said. I comforted
Mrs. van Daan, who was very frightened. We talked about escaping, being interrogated
by the Gestapo, phoning Mr. Kleiman and being courageous.
"We must behave like soldiers, Mrs. van Daan. If our time has come, well then, it'll be
for Queen and Country, for freedom, truth and justice, as they're always telling us on
the radio. The only bad thing is that we'll drag the others down with us!"
After an hour Mr. van Daan switched places with his wife again, and Father came and
sat beside me. The men smoked one cigarette after another, an occasional sigh was
heard, somebody made another trip to the potty, and then everything began allover
again.
Four o'clock, five, five-thirty. I went and sat with Peter by his window and listened,
so close we could feel each other's bodies trembling; we spoke a word or two from
time to time and listened intently. Next door they took down the blackout screen.
They made a list of everything they were planning to tell Mr. Kleiman over the phone,
because they intended to call him at seven and ask him to send someone over. They
were taking a big chance, since the police guard at the door or in the warehouse
might hear them calling, but there was an even greater risk that the police would
return.
I'm enclosing their list, but for the sake of clarity, I'll copy it here.
Buralary: Police in building, up to bookcase, but no farther. Burglars apparently
interrupted, forced warehouse door, fled through garden. Main entrance bolted; Kugler
must have left through second door.
Typewriter and adding machine safe in black chest in private office.
Miep's or Bep's laundry in washtub in kitchen.
Only Bep or Kugler have key to second door; lock may be broken.
Try to warn jan and get key, look around office; also feed cat.
For the rest, everything went according to plan. Mr. Kleiman was phoned, the poles
were removed from the doors, the typewriter was put back in the chest. Then we all
sat around the table again and waited for either jan or the police.
Peter had dropped off to sleep and Mr. van Daan ANNE FRANK and I were lying on
the floor when we heard loud footsteps below. I got up quietly. "It's Jan!"
"No, no, it's the police!" they all said.
There was a knocking at our bookcase. Miep whis- tled. This was too much for Mrs.
van Daan, who sank limply in her chair, white as a sheet. If the tension had lasted
another minute, she would have fainted.
Jan and Miep came in and were met with a delightful scene. The table alone would
have been worth a photograph: a copy of Cinema &.. Theater, opened to a page of
dancing girls and smeared with jam and pectin, which we'd been taking to combat the
diarrhea, two jam jars, half a bread roll, a quarter of a bread roll, pectin, a mirror, a
comb, matches, ashes, cigarettes, tobacco, an ashtray, books, a pair of underpants, a
flashlight, Mrs. van Daan's comb, toilet paper, etc.
Jan and Miep were of course greeted with shouts and tears. Jan nailed a pinewood
board over the gap in the door and went off again with Miep to inform the police of
the break-in. Miep had also found a note under the ware- house door from Sleegers,
the night watchman, who had noticed the hole and alerted the police. Jan was also
planning to see Sleegers.
So we had half an hour in which to put the house and ourselves to rights. I've never
seen such a transformation as in those thirty minutes. Margot and I got the beds
ready downstairs, went to the bathroom, brushed our teeth, washed our hands and
combed our hair. Then I straightened up the room a bit and went back upstairs. The
table had already been cleared, so we got some water, made coffee and tea, boiled the
milk and set the table. Father and Peter emptied our improvised potties and rinsed
them with warm water and powdered bleach. The largest one was filled to the brim
and was so heavy they had a hard time lifting it. To make things worse, it was
leaking, so they had to put it in a bucket.
At eleven o'clock Jan was back and joined us at the table, and gradually everyone
began to relax. Jan had the following story to tell:
Mr. Sleegers was asleep, but his wife told Jan that her husband had discovered the
hole in the door while making his rounds. He called in a policeman, and the two of
them searched the building. Mr. Sleegers, in his capacity as night watchman, patrols
the area every night on his bike, accompanied by his two dogs. His wife said he would
come on Tuesday and tell Mr. Kugler the rest. No one at the police station seemed to
know anything about the break-in, but they made a note to come first thing Tuesday
morning to have a look.
On the way back Jan happened to run into Mr. van Hoeven, the man who supplies us
with potatoes, and told him of the break-in. "I know," Mr. van Hoeven calmly replied.
"Last night when my wife and I were walking past your building, I saw a gap in the
door. My wife wanted to walk on, but I peeked inside with a flashlight, and that's
when the burglars must have run off. To be on the safe side, I didn't call the police. I
thought it wouldn't be wise in your case. I don't know anything, but I have my
suspicions." Jan thanked him and went on. Mr. van Hoeven obviously suspects we're
here, because he always delivers the potatoes at lunchtime. A decent man!
It was one o'clock by the time Jan left and we'd done the dishes. All eight of us went
to bed. I woke up at quarter to three and saw that Mr. Dussel was already up. My
face rumpled with sleep, I happened to run into Peter in the bathroom, just after he'd
come downstairs. We agreed to meet in the office. I freshened up a bit and went
down.
"After all this, do you still dare go to the front attic?" he asked. I nodded, grabbed
my pillow, with a cloth wrapped around it, and we went up together. The weather was
gorgeous, and even though the air-raid sirens soon began to wail, we stayed where
we were. Peter put his arm around my shoulder, I put mine around his, and we sat
quietly like this until four o'clock, when Margot came to get us for coffee.
We ate our bread, drank our lemonade and joked (we were finally able to again), and
for the rest everything was back to normal. That evening I thanked Peter because he'd
been the bravest of us all.
None of us have ever been in such danger as we were that night. God was truly
watching over us. Just think-the police were right at the bookcase, the light was on,
and still no one had discovered our hiding place! "Now we're done for!" I'd whispered
at that moment, but once again we were spared. When the invasion comes and the
bombs start falling, it'll be every man for himself, but this time we feared for those
good, innocent Christians who are helping us.
"We've been saved, keep on saving us!" That's all we can say.
This incident has brought about a whole lot of changes. As of now, Dussel will be
doing his work in the bathroom, and Peter will be patrolling the house between
eight-thirty and nine-thirty. Peter isn't allowed to open his window anymore, since
one of the Keg people noticed it was open. We can no longer flush the toilet after
nine-thirty at night. Mr. Sleegers has been hired as night watchman, and tonight a
carpenter from the underground is coming to make a barricade out of our white
Frankfurt bedsteads. Debates are going on left and right in the Annex. Mr. Kugler has
reproached us for our carelessness. Jan also said we should never go downstairs. What
we have to do now is find out whether Sleegers can be trusted, whether the dogs will
bark if they hear someone behind the door, how to make the barricade, all sorts of
things.
We've been strongly reminded of the fact that we're Jews in chains, chained to one
spot, without any rights, but with a thousand obligations. We must put our feelings
aside; we must be brave and strong, bear discomfort with- out complaint, do whatever
is in our power and trust in God. One day this terrible war will be over. The time will
come when we'll be people again and not just Jews!
Who has inflicted this on us? Who has set us apart from all the rest? Who has put us
through such suffering? It's God who has made us the way we are, but it's also God
who will lift us up again. In the eyes of the world, we're doomed, but if, after all this
suffering, there are still Jews left, the Jewish people will be held up as an example.
Who knows, maybe our religion will teach the world and all the people in it about
goodness, and that's the reason, the only reason, we have to suffer. We can never be
just Dutch, or just English, or whatever, we will always be Jews as well. And we'll
have to keep on being Jews, but then, we'll want to be.
Be brave! Let's remember our duty and perform it without complaint. There will be a
way out. God has never deserted our people. Through the ages Jews have had to
suffer, but through the ages they've gone on living, and the centuries of suffering have
only made them stronger. The weak shall fall and the strong shall survive and not be
defeated!
That night I really thought I was going to die. I waited for the police and I was ready
for death, like a soldier on a battlefield. I'd gladly have given my life for my country.
But now, now that I've been spared, my first wish after the war is to become a Dutch
citizen. I love the Dutch, I love this country, I love the language, and I want to work
here. And even if I have to write to the Queen herself, I won't give up until I've
reached my goal!
I'm becoming more and more independent of my parents. Young as I am, I face life
with more courage and have a better and truer sense of justice than Mother. I know
what I want, I have a goal, I have opinions, a religion and love. If only I can be
myself, I'll be satisfied. I know that I'm a woman, a woman with inner strength and a
great deal of courage!
If God lets me live, I'll achieve more than Mother ever did, I'll make my voice heard,
I'll go out into the world and work for mankind!
I now know that courage and happiness are needed first!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
FRIDAY, APRIL 14, 1944
Dear Kitty,
Everyone here is still very tense. Pim has nearly reached the bothng point; Mrs. van
D. is lying in bed with a cold, grumbling; Mr. van D. is growing pale without his
cigarettes; Dussel, who's having to give up many of his comforts, is carping at
everyone; etc., etc. We seem to have run out of luck lately. The toilet's leaking, and
the faucet's stuck. Thanks to our many connections, we'll soon be able to get these
repaired.
I'm occasionally sentimental, as you know, but from time to time I have reason to be:
when Peter and I are sitting close together on a hard wooden crate among the junk
and dust, our arms around each other's shoulders, Peter toying with a lock of my hair;
when the birds outside are trilling their songs, when the trees are in bud, when the
sun beckons and the sky is so blue--oh, that's when I wish for so much!
All I see around me are dissatisfied and grumpy faces, all I hear are sighs and stifled
complaints. You'd think our lives had taken a sudden turn for the worse. Honestly,
things are only as bad as you make them. Here in the Annex no one even bothers to
set a good example. We each have to figure out how to get the better of our own
moods!
Every day you hear, "If only it were all over!"
Work, love, courage and hope,
Make me good and help me cope!
I really believe, Kit, that I'm a little nutty today, and I don't know why. My writing's
all mixed up, I'm jump- ing from one thing to another, and sometimes I seriously
doubt whether anyone will ever be interested in this drivel. They'll probably call it
"The Musings of an Ugly Duckling." My diaries certainly won't be of much use to Mr.
Bolkestein or Mr. Gerbrandy.* [* Gerrit Bolkestein was the Minister of Education and
Pieter Gerbrandy was the Prime Minister of the Dutch government in exile in London.
See Anne's letter of March 29, 1944.]
Yours, Anne M. Frank
SATURDAY, APRIL 15, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
"There's just one bad thing after another. When will it all end?" You can sure say that
again. Guess what's happened now? Peter forgot to unbolt the front door. As a result,
Mr. Kugler and the warehouse employees couldn't get in. He went to Keg's, smashed
in our office kitchen window and got in that way. The windows in the Annex were
open, and the Keg people saw that too. What must they be thinking? And van Maaren?
Mr. Kugler's furious. We accuse him of not doing anything to reinforce the doors, and
then we do a stupid thing like this! Peter's extremely upset. At the table, Mother said
she felt more sorry for Peter than for anyone else, and he nearly began to cry. We're
equally to blame, since we usually ask him every day if he's unbolted the door, and so
does Mr. van Daan. Maybe I can go comfort him later on. I want to help him so
much!
Here are the latest news bulletins about life in the Secret Annex over the last few
weeks:
A week ago Saturday, Boche suddenly got sick. He sat quite still and started drooling.
Miep immediately picked him up, rolled him in a towel, tucked him in her shopping bag
and brought him to the dog-and-cat clinic. Boche had some kind of intestinal problem,
so the vet gave him medicine. Peter gave it to him a few times, but Boche soon made
himself scarce. I'll bet he was out courting his sweetheart. But now his nose is
swollen and he meows whenever you pick him up-he was probably trying to steal
food and somebody smacked him. Mouschi lost her voice for a few days. Just when
we decided she had to be taken to the vet too, she started getting better.
We now leave the attic window open a crack every night. Peter and I often sit up
there in the evening.
Thanks to rubber cement and oil paint, our toilet ; could quickly be repaired. The
broken faucet has been replaced.
Luckily, Mr. Kleiman is feeling better. He's going to see a specialist soon. We can
only hope he won't need an operation.
This month we received eight Tation books. Unfortunately, for the next two weeks
beans have been substituted for oatmeal or groats. Our latest delicacy is piccalilli. If
you're out of luck, all you get is a jar full of cucumber and mustard sauce.
Vegetables are hard to come by. There's only lettuce, lettuce and more lettuce. Our
meals consist entirely of potatoes and imitation gravy.
The Russians are in possession of more than half the Crimea. The British aren't
advancing beyond Cassino. We'll have to count on the Western Wall. There have been
a lot of unbelievably heavy air raids. The Registry of Births, Deaths and Marriages in
The Hague was bombed. All Dutch people will be issued new ration registration cards.
Enough for today.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
SUNDAY, APRIL 16, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
Remember yesterday's date, since it was a red-letter day for me. Isn't it an important
day for every girl when she gets her first kiss? Well then, it's no less important to
me. The time Bram kissed me on my right cheek or Mr. Woudstra on my right hand
doesn't count. How did I suddenly come by this kiss? I'll tell you.
Last night at eight I was sitting with Peter on his divan and it wasn't long before he
put an arm around me. (Since it was Saturday, he wasn't wearing his overalls.)"Why
don t we move over a little," I said, "so won t keep bumping my head against the
cupboard."
He moved so far over he was practically in the corner. I slipped my arm under his
and across his back, and he put his arm around my shoulder, so that I was nearly
engulfed by him. We've sat like this on other occasions, but never so close as we
were last night. He held me firmly against him, my left side against his chest; my
heart had already begun to beat faster, but there was more to come. He wasn't
satisfied until my head lay on his shoulder, with his on top of mine. I sat up again
after about five minutes, but before long he took my head in his hands and put it back
next to his. Oh, it was so wonderful. I could hardly talk, my pleasure was too intense;
he caressed my cheek and arm, a bit clumsily, and played with my hair. Most of the
time our heads were touching.
I can't tell you, Kitty, the feeling that ran through me. I was too happy for words, and
I think he was too.
At nine-thirty we stood up. Peter put on his tennis shoes so he wouldn't make much
noise on his nightly round of the building, and I was standing next to him. How I
suddenly made the right movement, I don't know, but before we went downstairs, he
gave me a. kiss, through my hair, half on my left cheek and half on my ear. I tore
downstairs without looking back, and I long so much for today.
Sunday morning, just before eleven.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
MONDAY, APRIL 17, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Do you think Father and Mother would approve of a girl my age sitting on a divan and
kissing a seventeen-and- a-half-year-old boy? I doubt they would, but I have to
trust my own judgment in this matter. It's so peaceful and safe, lying in his arms and
dreaming, it's so thrilling to feel his cheek against mine, it's so wonderful to know
there's someone waiting for me. But, and there is a but, will Peter want to leave it at
that? I haven't forgotten his promise, but. . . he is a boy!
I know I'm starting at a very young age. Not even fifteen and already so independent
-- that's a little hard for other people to understand. I'm pretty sure Margot would
never kiss a boy unless there was some talk of an engagement or marriage. Neither
Peter nor I has any such plans. I'm also sure that Mother never touched a man before
she met Father. What would my girlfriends or Jacque say if they knew I'd lain in
Peter's arms with my heart against his chest, my head on his shoulder and his head
and face against mine!
Oh, Anne, how terribly shocking! But seriously, I don't think it's at all shocking; we're
cooped up here, cut off from the world, anxious and fearful, especially lately. Why
should we stay apart when we love each other? Why shouldn't we kiss each other in
times like these? Why should we wait until we've reached a suitable age? Why should
we ask anybody's permission?
I've decided to look out for my own interests. He'd never want to hurt me or make
me unhappy. Why shouldn't I do what my heart tells me and makes both of us happy?
Yet I have a feeling, Kitty, that you can sense my doubt. It must be my honesty
rising in revolt against all this sneaking around. Do you think it's my duty to tell
Father what I'm up to? Do you think our secret should be shared with a third person?
Much of the beauty would be lost, but would it make me feel better inside? I'll bring
it up with him.
Oh, yes, I still have so much I want to discuss with him, since I don't see the point
of just cuddling. Sharing our thoughts with each other requires a great deal of trust,
but we'll both be stronger because of it!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
P.S. We were up at six yesterday morning, because the whole family heard the sounds
of a break-in again. It must have been one of our neighbors who was the victim this
time. When we checked at seven o'clock, our doors were still shut tight, thank
goodness!
TUESDAY, APRIL 18,1944
Dearest Kitty,
Everything's fine here. Last night the carpenter came again to put some sheets of iron
over the door panels. Father just got through saying he definitely expects large-scale
operations in Russia and Italy, as well as in the West, before May 20; the longer the
war lasts, the harder it is to imagine being liberated from this place.
Yesterday Peter and I finally got around to having the talk we've been postponing for
the last ten days. I told him all about girls, without hesitating to discuss the most
intimate matters. I found it rather amusing that he thought the opening in a woman's
body was simply left out of illustrations. He couldn't imagine that it was actually
located between a woman's legs. The evening ended with a mutual kiss, near the
mouth. It's really a lovely feeling!
I might take my "favorite quotes notebook" up with me sometime so Peter and I can
go more deeply into matters. I don't think lying in each other's arms day in and day
out is very satisfying, and I hope he feels the same.
After our mild winter we've been having a beautiful spring. April is glorious, not too
hot and not too cold, with occasional light showers. Our chestnut tree is in leaf, and
here and there you can already see a few small blossoms.
Bep presented us Saturday with four bouquets of flowers: three bouquets of daffodils,
and one bouquet of grape hyacinths for me. Mr. Kugler is supplying us with more and
more newspapers.
It's time to do my algebra, Kitty. Bye.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 19, 1944
Dearest Darling,
(That's the title of a movie with Dorit Kreysler, Ida Wust and Harald Paulsen!)
What could be nicer than sitting before an open window, enjoying nature, listening to
the birds sing, feeling the sun on your cheeks and holding a darling boy in your arms?
I feel so peaceful and safe with his arm around me, knowing he's near and yet not
having to speak; how can this be bad when it does me so much good? Oh, if only we
were never disturbed again, not even by Mouschi.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
FRIDAY, APRIL 21,1944
My dearest Kitty,
I stayed in bed yesterday with a sore throat, but since I was already bored the very
first afternoon and didn't have a fever, I got up today. My sore throat has nearly
"verschwunden"* [* disappeared].
Yesterday, as you've probably already discovered, was our Fiihrer's fifty-fifth
birthday. Today is the eighteenth birthday of Her Royal Highness Princess Elizabeth of
York. The BBC reported that she hasn't yet been declared of age, though royal
children usually are. We've been wondering which prince they'll marry this beauty off
to, but can't think of a suitable candidate; perhaps her sister, Princess Margaret Rose,
can have Crown Prince Baudouin of Belgium!
Here we've been going from one disaster to the next. No sooner have the outside
doors been reinforced than van Maaren rears his head again. In all likelihood he's the
one who stole the potato flour, and now he's trying to pin the blame on Bep. Not
surprisingly, the Annex is once again in an uproar. Bep is beside herself with rage.
Perhaps Mr. Kugler will finally have this shady character tailed.
The appraiser from Beethovenstraat was here this morning. He offered us 400 guilders
for our chest; in our opinion, the other estimates are also too low.
I want to ask the magazine The Prince if they'll take one of my fairy tales, under a
pseudonym, of course. But up to now all my fairy tales have been too long, so I don't
think I have much of a chance.
Until the next time, darling.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
TUESDAY, APRIL 25, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
For the last ten days Dussel hasn't been on speaking terms with Mr. van Daan, and all
because of the new security measures since the break-in. One of these was that he's
no longer allowed to go downstairs in the evenings. Peter and Mr. van Daan make the
last round every night at nine-thirty, and after that no one may go downstairs. We
can't flush the toilet anymore after eight at night or after eight in the morning. The
windows may be opened only in the morning when the lights go on in Mr. Kugler's
office, and they can no longer be propped open with a stick at night. This last
measure is the reason for Dussel's sulking. He claims that Mr. van Daan bawled him
out, but he has only himself to blame. He says he'd rather live without food than
without air, and that they simply must figure out a way to keep the windows open.
"I'll have to speak to Mr. Kugler about this," he said to me.
I replied that we never discussed matters of this sort with Mr. Kugler, only within the
group.
"Everything's always happening behind my back. I'll have to talk to your father about
that."
He's also not allowed to sit in Mr. Kugler's office anymore on Saturday afternoons or
Sundays, because the manager of Keg's might hear him if he happens to be next door.
Dussel promptly went and sat there anyway. Mr. van Daan was furious, and Father
went downstairs to talk to Dussel, who came up with some flimsy excuse, but even
Father didn't fall for it this time. Now Father's keep- ing his dealings with Dussel to
a minimum because Dussel insulted him. Not one of us knows what he said, but it
must have been pretty awful.
And to think that that miserable man has his birthday next week. How can you
celebrate your birthday when you've got the sulks, how can you accept gifts from
people you won't even talk to?
Mr. Voskuijl is going downhill rapidly. For more than ten days he's had a temperature
of almost a hundred and four. The doctor said his condition is hopeless; they think the
cancer has spread to his lungs. The poor man, we'd so like to help him, but only God
can help him now!
I've written an amusing story called "Blurry the Explorer," which was a big hit with
my three listeners.
I still have a bad cold and have passed it on to Margot, as well as Mother and Father.
If only Peter doesn't get it. He insisted on a kiss, and called me his El Dorado. You
can't call a person that, silly boy! But he's sweet anyway!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
THURSDAY, APRIL 27, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Mrs. van D. was in a bad mood this morning. All she did was complain, first about her
cold, not being able to get cough drops and the agony of having to blow her nose all
the time. Next she grumbled that the sun wasn't shining, the invasion hadn't started,
we weren't allowed to look out the windows, etc., etc. We couldn't help but laugh at
her, and it couldn't have been that bad, since she soon joined in.
Our recipe for potato kugel, modified due to lack of onions:
Put peeled potatoes through a food mill and add a little dry government-issue flour
and salt. Grease a mold or ovenproof dish with paraffin or stearin and bake for 21/2
hours. Serve with rotten strawberry compote. (Onions not available. Nor oil for mold
or dough!)
At the moment I'm reading Emperor Charles V, written by a professor at the
University of Gottingen; he's spent forty years working on this book. It took me five
days to read fifty pages. I can't do any more than that. Since the book has 598 pages,
you can figure out just how long it's going to take me. And that's not even counting
the second volume. But. . . very interesting!
The things a schoolgirl has to do in the course of a single day! Take me, for
example. First, I translated a passage on Nelson's last battle from Dutch into English.
Then, I read more about the Northern War (1700-21) involving Peter the Great,
Charles XII, Augustus the Strong, Stanislaus Leczinsky, Mazeppa, von Gorz, Brandenburg, Western Pomerania, Eastern Pomerania and Denmark, plus the usual dates.
Next, I wound up in Brazil, where I read about Bahia tobacco, the abundance of coffee,
the one and a half million inhabitants of Rio de Janeiro, Pernambuco and Sao Paulo
and, last but not least, the Amazon River. Then about Negroes, mulattoes, mestizos,
whites, the illiteracy rate -- over 50 percent -- and malaria. Since I had some time
left, I glanced through a genealogical chart: John the Old, William Louis, Ernest
Casimir I, Henry Casimir I, right up to little Margriet Franciska (born in 1943 in
Ottawa).
Twelve o'clock: I resumed my studies in the attic, reading about deans, priests,
ministers, popes and . . . whew, it was one o'clock!
At two the poor child (ho hum) was back at work. Old World and New World
monkeys were next. Kitty, tell me quickly, how many toes does a hippopotamus have?
Then came the Bible, Noah's Ark, Shem, Ham and Japheth. After that, Charles V.
Then, with Peter, Thack- eray's book about the colonel, in English. A French test,
and then a comparison between the Mississippi and the Missouri!
Enough for today. Adieu!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
FRIDAY, APRIL 28, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
I've never forgotten my dream of Peter Schiff (see the beginning of January). Even
now I can still feel his cheek against mine, and that wonderful glow that made up for
all the rest. Once in a while I'd had the same feeling with this Peter, but never so
intensely. . . until last night. We were sitting on the divan, as usual, in each other's
arms. Suddenly the everyday Anne slipped away and the second Anne took her place.
The second Anne, who's never overconfident or amusing, but wants only to love and
be gentle.
I sat pressed against him and felt a wave of emotion come over me. Tears rushed to
my eyes; those from the left fell on his overalls, while those from the right trickled
down my nose and into the air and landed beside the first. Did he notice? He made no
movement to show that he had. Did he feel the same way I did? He hardly said a
word. Did he realize he had two Annes at his side? My questions went unanswered.
At eight-thirty I stood up and went to the window, where we always say good-bye. I
was still trembling, I was still Anne number two. He came over to me, and I threw
my arms around his neck and kissed him on his left cheek. I was about to kiss the
other cheek when my mouth met his, and we pressed our lips together. In a daze, we
embraced, over and over again, never to stop, oh!
Peter needs tenderness. For the first time in his life he's discovered a girl; for the
first time he's seen that even the biggest pests also have an inner self and a heart,
and are transformed as soon as they're alone with you. For the first time in his life
he's given himself and his friendship to another person. He's never had a friend
before, boy or girl. Now we've found each other. I, for that matter, didn't know him
either, had never had someone I could confide in, and it's led to this . . .
The same question keeps nagging me: "Is it right?" Is it right for me to yield so soon,
for me to be so passionate, to be filled with as much passion and desire as Peter?
Can I, a girl, allow myself to go that far?
There's only one possible answer: "I'm longing so much. . . and have for such a long
time. I'm so lonely and now I've found comfort!"
In the mornings we act normally, in the afternoons too, except now and then. But in
the evenings the suppressed longing of the entire day, the happiness and the bliss of
all the times before come rushing to the surface, and all we can think about is each
other. Every night, after our last kiss, I feel like running away and never looking him
in the eyes again. Away, far away into the darkness and alone!
And what awaits me at the bottom of those fourteen stairs? Bright lights, questions
and laughter. I have to act normally and hope they don't notice anything.
My heart is still too tender to be able to recover so quickly from a shock like the one
I had last night. The gentle Anne makes infrequent appearances, and she's not about
to let herself be shoved out the door so soon after she's arrived. Peter's reached a
part of me that no one has ever reached before, except in my dream! He's taken hold
of me and turned me inside out. Doesn't everyone need a little quiet time to put
themselves to rights again? Oh, Peter, what have you done to me? What do you want
from me?
Where will this lead? Oh, now I understand Bep. Now, now that I'm going through it
myself, I understand her doubts; if I were older and he wanted to marry me, what
would my answer be? Anne, be honest! You wouldn't be able to marry him. But it's so
hard to let go. Peter still has too little character, too little willpower, too little
courage and strength. He's still a child, emotionally no older than I am; all he wants is
happiness and peace of mind. Am I really only fourteen? Am I really just a silly
schoolgirl? Am I really so inexperienced in everything? I have more experience than
most; I've experienced something almost no one my age ever has.
I'm afraid of myself, afraid my longing is making me yield too soon. How can it ever
go right with other boys later on? Oh, it's so hard, the eternal struggle between heart
and mind. There's a time and a place for both, but how can I be sure that I've chosen
the right time?
Yours, Anne M. Frank
TUESDAY, MAY 2, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Saturday night I asked Peter whether he thinks I should tell Father about us. After
we'd discussed it, he said he thought I should. I was glad; it shows he's sensible, and
sensitive. As soon as I came downstairs, I went with Father to get some water. While
we were on the stairs, I said, "Father, I'm sure you've gathered that when Peter and I
are together, we don't exactly sit at opposite ends of the room. Do you think that's
wrong?"
Father paused before answering: "No, I don't think it's wrong. But Anne, when you're
living so close together, as we do, you have to be careful." He said some other words
to that effect, and then we went upstairs.
Sunday morning he called me to him and said, "Anne, I've been thinking about what
you said." (Oh, oh, I knew what was coming!) "Here in the Annex it's not such a
good idea. I thought you were just friends. Is Peter in love with you?"
"Of course not," I answered.
"Well, you know I understand both of you. But you must be the one to show restraint;
don't go upstairs so often, don't encourage him more than you can help. In matters
like these, it's always the man who takes the active role, and it's up to the woman to
set the limits. Outside, where you're free, things are quite different. You see other
boys and girls, you can go outdoors, take part in sports and all kinds of activities. But
here, if you're together too much and want to get away, you can't. You see each other
every hour of the day-all the time, in fact. Be careful, Anne, and don't take it too
seriously!
"I don't, Father, but Peter's a decent boy, a nice boy."
"Yes, but he doesn't have much strength of character. He can easily be influenced to
do good, but also to do bad. I hope for his sake that he stays good, because he's
basically a good person."
We talked some more and agreed that Father would speak to him too.
Sunday afternoon when we were in the front attic, Peter asked, "Have you talked to
your Father yet, Anne?"
"Yes," I replied, "I'll tell you all about it. He doesn't think it's wrong, but he says that
here, where we're in such close quarters, it could lead to conflicts."
"We've already agreed not to quarrel, and I plan to keep my promise."
"Me too, Peter. But Father didn't think we were serious, he thought we were just
friends. Do you think we still can be?"
"Yes, I do. How about you?"
"Me too. I also told Father that I trust you. I do trust you, Peter, just as much as I
do Father. And I think you're worthy of my trust. You are, aren't you?"
"I hope so." (He was very shy, and blushing.)
"I believe in you, Peter," I continued. "I believe you have a good character and that
you'll get ahead in this world."
After that we talked about other things. Later I said, "If we ever get out of here, I
know you won't give me another thought."
He got all fired up. "That's not true, Anne. Oh no, I won't let you even think that
about me!"
Just then somebody called us.
Father did talk to him, he told me Monday. "Your Father thought our friendship might
turn into love," he said. "But I told him we'd keep ourselves under control."
Father wants me to stop going upstairs so often, but I don't want to. Not just because
I like being with Peter, but because I've said I trust him. I do trust him, and I want
to prove it to him, but I'll never be able to if I stay downstairs out of distrust.
No, I'm going!
In the meantime, the Dussel drama has been resolved. Saturday evening at dinner he
apologized in beautiful Dutch. Mr. van Daan was immediately reconciled. Dussel must
have spent all day practicing his speech.
Sunday, his birthday, passed without incident. We gave him a bottle of good wine from
1919, the van Daans (who can now give their gift after all) presented him with a jar
of piccalilli and a package of razor blades, and Mr. Kugler gave him a jar of lemon
syrup (to make lemonade), Miep a book, Little Martin, and Bep a plant. He treated
everyone to an egg.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
WEDNESDAY, MAY 3, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
First the weekly news! We're having a vacation from politics. There's nothing, and I
mean absolutely nothing, to report. I'm also gradually starting to believe that the
invasion will come. After all, they can't let the Russians do all the dirty work;
actually, the Russians aren't doing anything at the moment either.
Mr. Kleiman comes to the office every morning now. He got a new set of springs for
Peter's divan, so Peter will have to get to work reupholstering it; Not surprisingly, he
isn't at all in the mood. Mr. Kleiman also brought some flea powder for the cats.
Have I told you that our Boche has disappeared? We haven't seen hide nor hair of her
since last Thursday. She's probably already in cat heaven, while some animal lover has
turned her into a tasty dish. Perhaps some girl who can afford it will be wearing a
cap made of Boche's fur. Peter is heartbroken.
For the last two weeks we've been eating lunch at eleven-thirty on Saturdays; in the
mornings we have to make do with a cup of hot cereal. Starting tomorrow it'll be like
this every day; that saves us a meal. Vegetables are still very hard to come by. This
afternoon we had rotten boiled lettuce. Ordinary lettuce, spinach and boiled let- tuce,
that's all there is. Add to that rotten potatoes, and you have a meal fit for a king!
I hadn't had my period for more than two months, but it finally started last Sunday.
Despite the mess and bother, I'm glad it hasn't deserted me.
As you can no doubt imagine, we often say in despair, "What's the point of the war?
Why, oh, why can't people live together peacefully? Why all this destruction?"
The question is understandable, but up to now no one has come up with a satisfactory
answer. Why is England manufacturing bigger and better airplanes and bombs and at
the same time churning out new houses for reconstruction? Why are millions spent on
the war each day, while not a penny is available for medical science, artists or the
poor? Why do people have to starve when mountains of food are rotting away in other
parts of the world? Oh, why are people so crazy?
I don't believe the war is simply the work of politicians and capitalists. Oh no, the
common man is every bit as guilty; otherwise, people and nations would have rebelled long ago! There's a destructive urge in people, the urge to rage, murder and
kill. And until all of humanity, without exception, undergoes a metamorphosis, wars
will continue to be waged, and everything that has been carefully built up, cultivated
and grown will be cut down and destroyed, only to start allover again!
I've often been down in the dumps, but never desperate. I look upon our life in hiding
as an interesting adventure, full of danger and romance, and every privation as an
amusing addition to my diary. I've made up my mind to lead a different life from other
girls, and not to become an ordinary housewife later on. What I'm experiencing here is
a good beginning to an interesting life, and that's the reason -- the only reason --
why I have to laugh at the humorous side of the most dangerous moments.
I'm young and have many hidden qualities; I'm young and strong and living through a
big adventure; I'm right in the middle of it and can't spend all day complaining because
it's impossible to have any fun! I'm blessed with many things: happiness, a cheerful
disposition and strength. Every day I feel myself maturing, I feel liberation drawing
near, I feel the beauty of nature and the goodness of the people around me. Every
day I think what a fascinating and amusing adventure this is! With all that, why should
I despair?
Yours, Anne M. Frank
FRIDAY, MAY 5, 1944
Dear Kitty,
Father's unhappy with me. After our talk on Sunday he thought I'd stop going upstairs
every evening. He won't have any of that "Knutscherej"* [* Necking] going on. I can't
stand that word. Talking about it was bad enough -- why does he have to make me
feel bad too! I'll have a word with him today. Margot gave me some good advice.
Here's more or less what I'd like to say:
I think you expect an explanation from me, Father, so I'll give you one. You're disappointed in me, you expected more restraint from me, you no doubt want me to act the
way a fourteen-year-old is supposed to. But that's where you're wrong!
Since we've been here, from July 1942 until a few weeks ago, I haven't had an easy
time. If only you knew how much I used to cry at night, how unhappy and despondent
I was, how lonely I felt, you'd understand my wanting to go upstairs! I've now
reached the point where I don't need the support of Mother or anyone else. It didn't
happen overnight. I've struggled long and hard and shed many tears to become as
independent as I am now. You can laugh and refuse to believe me, but I don't care. I
know I'm an independent person, and I don't feel I need to account to you for my
actions. I'm only telling you this because I don't want you to think I'm doing things
behind your back. But there's only one person I'm accountable to, and that's me.
When I was having problems, everyone -- and that includes you -- closed their
eyes and ears and didn't help me. On the contrary, all I ever got were admonitions not
to be so noisy. I was noisy only to keep myself from being miserable all the time. I
was overconfident to keep from having to listen to the voice inside me. I've been
putting on an act for the last year and a half, day in, day out. I've never complained
or dropped my mask, nothing of the kind, and now. . . now the battle is over. I've
won! I'm independent, in both body and mind. I don't need a mother anymore, and I've
emerged from the struggle a stronger person.
Now that it's over, now that I know the battle has been won, I want to go my own
way, to follow the path that seems right to me. Don't think of me as a
fourteen-year-old, since all these troubles have made me older; I won't regret my
actions, I'll behave the way I think I should!
Gentle persuasion won't keep me from going upstairs. You'll either have to forbid it, or
trust me through thick and thin. Whatever you do, just leave me alone!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
SATURDAY, MAY 6, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Last night before dinner I tucked the letter I'd written into Father's pocket. According
to Margot, he read it and was upset for the rest of the evening. (I was upstairs doing
the dishes!) Poor Pim, I might have known what the effect of such an epistle would
be. He's so sensitive! I immediately told Peter not to ask any questions or say
anything more. Pim's said nothing else to me about the matter. Is he going to?
Everything here is more or less back to normal. We can hardly believe what Jan, Mr.
Kugler and Mr. Kleiman tell us about the prices and the people on the outside; half a
pound of tea costs 350.00 guilders, half a pound of coffee 80.00 guilders, a pound of
butter 35.00 guilders, one egg 1.45 guilders. People are paying 14.00 guilders an
ounce for Bulgarian tobacco! Everyone's trading on the black market; every errand boy
has something to offer. The delivery boy from the bakery has supplied us with darning
thread-90 cents for one measly skein-the milkman can get hold of ration books, an
undertaker delivers cheese. Break-ins, murders and thefts are daily occurrences. Even
the police and night watchmen are getting in on the act. Everyone wants to put food
in their stomachs, and since salaries have been frozen, people have had to resort to
swindling. The police have their hands full trying to track down the many girls of
fifteen, sixteen, seventeen and older who are reported missing every day.
I want to try to finish my story about Ellen, the fairy. Just for fun, I can give it to
Father on his birthday, together with all the copyrights.
See you later! (Actually, that's not the right phrase. In the German program broadcast
from England they always close with "Aufwiederhoren." So I guess I should say, "Until
we write again.")
Yours, Anne M. Frank
SUNDAY MORNING, MAY 7,1944
Dearest Kitty,
Father and I had a long talk yesterday afternoon. I cried my eyes out, and he cried
too. Do you know what he said to me, Kitty?
"I've received many letters in my lifetime, but none as hurtful as this. You, who have
had so much love from your parents. You, whose parents have always been ready to
help you, who have always defended you, no matter what. You talk of not having to
account to us for your actions! You feel you've been wronged and left to your own
devices. No, Anne, you've done us a great injustice!
"Perhaps you didn't mean it that way, but that's what you wrote. No, Anne, we have
done nothing to deserve such a reproach!"
Oh, I've failed miserably. This is the worst thing I've ever done in my entire life. I
used my tears to show off, to make myself seem important so he'd respect me. I've
certainly had my share of unhappiness, and everything I said about Mother is true. But
to accuse Pim, who's so good and who's done everything for me-no, that was too
cruel for words.
It's good that somebody has finally cut me down to size, has broken my pride,
because I've been far too smug. Not everything Mistress Anne does is good! Anyone who deliberately causes such pain to someone they say they love is despicable,
the lowest of the low!
What I'm most ashamed of is the way Father has forgiven me; he said he's going to
throw the letter in the stove, and he's being so nice to me now, as if he were the
one who'd done something wrong. Well, Anne, you still have a lot to learn. It's time
you made a beginning, in- stead of looking down at others and always giving them the
blame!
I've known a lot of sorrow, but who hasn't at my age? I've been putting on an act, but
was hardly even aware of it. I've felt lonely, but never desperate! Not like Father,
who once ran out into the street with a knife so he could put an end to it all. I've
never gone that far.
I should be deeply ashamed of myself, and I am. What's done can't be undone, but at
least you can keep it from happening again. I'd like to start all over, and that shouldn't
be difficult, now that I have Peter. With him supporting me, I know I can do it! I'm
not alone anymore. He loves me, I love him, I have my books, my writing and my
diary. I'm not all that ugly, or that stupid, I have a sunny disposition, and I want to
develop a good character!
Yes, Anne, you knew full well that your letter was unkind and untrue, but you were
actually proud of it! I'll take Father as my example once again, and I will improve
myself.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
MONDAY, MAY 8, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Have I ever told you anything about our family? I don't think I have, so let me begin.
Father was born in Frankfurt am Main to very wealthy parents: Michael Frank owned
a bank and became a millionaire, and Alice Stern's parents were prominent and
well-to-do. Michael Frank didn't start out rich; he was a self-made man. In his
youth Father led the life of a rich man's son. Parties every week, balls, banquets,
beautiful girls, waltzing, dinners, a huge house, etc. After Grandpa died, most of the
money was lost, and after the Great War and inflation there was nothing left at all. Up
until the war there were still quite a few rich relatives. So Father was extremely
well-bred, and he had to laugh yesterday because for the first time in his fifty-five
years, he scraped out the frying pan at the table.
Mother's family wasn't as wealthy, but still fairly well-off, and we've listened
openmouthed to stories of private balls, dinners and engagement parties with 250
guests.
We're far from rich now, but I've pinned all my hopes on after the war. I can assure
you, I'm not so set on a bourgeois life as Mother and Margot. I'd like to spend a year
in Paris and London learning the languages and studying art history. Compare that with
Margot, who wants to nurse newborns in Palestine. I still have visions of gorgeous
dresses and fascinating people. As I've told you many times before, I want to see the
world and do all kinds of exciting things, and a little money won't hurt!
This morning Miep told us about her cousin's engagement party, which she went to on
Saturday. The cousin's parents are rich, and the groom's are even richer. Miep made
our mouths water telling us about the food that was served: vegetable soup with
meatballs, cheese, rolls with sliced meat, hors d'oeuvres made with eggs and roast
beef, rolls with cheese, genoise, wine and cigarettes, and you could eat as much as
you wanted.
Miep drank ten schnapps and smoked three cigarettes -- could this be our
temperance advocate? If Miep drank all those, I wonder how many her spouse
managed to toss down? Everyone at the party was a little tipsy, of course. There
were also two officers from the Homicide Squad, who took photographs of the wedding
couple. You can see we're never far from Miep's thoughts, since she promptly noted
their names and addresses in case anything should happen and we needed contacts
with good Dutch people.
Our mouths were watering so much. We, who'd had nothing but two spoonfuls of hot
cereal for breakfast and were absolutely famished; we, who get nothing but
half-cooked spinach (for the vitamins!) and rotten pota- toes day after day; we, who
fill our empty stomachs with nothing but boiled lettuce, raw lettuce, spinach, spinach
and more spinach. Maybe we'll end up being as strong as Popeye, though up to now
I've seen no sign of it!
If Miep had taken us along to the party, there wouldn't have been any rolls left over
for the other guests. If we'd been there, we'd have snatched up everything in sight,
including the furniture. I tell you, we were practically pulling the words right out of
her mouth. We were gathered around her as if we'd never in all our lives heard of"
delicious food or elegant people! And these are the granddaughters of the distinguished
millionaire. The world is a crazy place!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
TUESDAY, MAY 9, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
I've finished my story about Ellen, the fairy. I've copied it out on nice notepaper,
decorated it with red ink and sewn the pages together. The whole thing looks quite
pretty, but I don't know if it's enough of a birthday present. Margot and Mother have
both written poems.
Mr. Kugler came upstairs this afternoon with the news that starting Monday, Mrs.
Broks would like to spend two hours in the office every afternoon. Just imagine! The
office staff won't be able to come upstairs, the potatoes can't be delivered, Bep won't
get her dinner, we can't go to the bathroom, we won't be able to move and all sorts
of other inconveniences! We proposed a variety of ways to get rid of her. Mr. van
Daan thought a good laxative in her coffee might do the trick. "No," Mr. Kleiman
answered, "please don't, or we'll never get her off the can.
A roar of laughter. "The can?" Mrs. van D. asked. "What does that mean?" An
explanation was given. "Is it all right to use that word?" she asked in perfect
innocence. "Just imagine," Bep giggled, "there you are shopping at The Bijenkorf and
you ask the way to the can. They wouldn't even know what you were talking about!"
Dussel now sits on the "can," to borrow the expression, every day at twelve-thirty on
the dot. This afternoon I boldly took a piece of pink paper and wrote:
Mr. Dussel's Toilet Timetable
Mornings from 7: 15 to 7:30 A.M.
Afternoons after 1 P.M.
Otherwise, only as needed!
I tacked this to the green bathroom door while he was still inside. I might well have
added' 'Transgressors will be subject to confinement!" Because our bathroom can be
locked from both the inside and the outside.
Mr. van Daan's latest joke:
After a Bible lesson about Adam and Eve, a thirteen-year-old boy asked his father,
"Tell me, Father, how did I get born?"
"Well," the father replied, "the stork plucked you out of the ocean, set you down in
Mother's bed and bit her in the leg, hard. It bled so much she had to stay in bed for
a week."
Not fully satisfied, the boy went to his mother. "Tell me, Mother," he asked, "how did
you get born and how did I get born?"
His mother told him the very same story. Finally, hoping to hear the fine points, he
went to his grandfather. "Tell me, Grandfather," he said, "how did you get born and
how did your daughter get born?" And for the third time he was told exactly the same
story.
That night he wrote in his diary: "After careful inquiry, I must conclude that there has
been no sexual intercourse in our family for the last three generations!"
I still have work to do; it's already three o'clock.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
PS. Since I think I've mentioned the new cleaning lady, I just want to note that she's
married, sixty years old and hard of hearing! Very convenient, in view of all the noise
that eight people in hiding are capable of mak- ing.
Oh, Kit, it's such lovely weather. If only I could go outside!
WEDNESDAY, MAY 10, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
We were sitting in the attic yesterday afternoon working on our French when suddenly
I heard the splatter of water behind me. I asked Peter what it might be. Without
pausing to reply, he dashed up to the loft-the scene of the disaster -- and shoved
Mouschi, who was squatting beside her soggy litter box, back to the right place. This
was followed by shouts and squeals, and then Mouschi, who by that time had finished
peeing, took off downstairs. In search of something similar to her box, Mouschi had
found herself a pile of wood shavings, right over a crack in the floor. The puddle
immediately trickled down to the attic and, as luck would have it, landed in and next
to the potato barrel. The cethng was dripping, and since the attic floor has also got its
share of cracks, little yellow drops were leaking through the ceiling and onto the
dining table, between a pile of stockings and books.
I was doubled up with laughter, it was such a funny sight. There was Mouschi
crouched under a chair, Peter armed with water, powdered bleach and a cloth, and Mr.
van Daan trying to calm everyone down. The room was soon set to rights, but it's a
well-known fact that cat puddles stink to high heaven. The potatoes proved that all
too well, as did the wood shavings, which Father collected in a bucket and brought
downstairs to burn.
Poor Mouschi! How were you to know it's impossible to get peat for your box?
Anne
THURSDAY, MAY 11, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
A new sketch to make you laugh:
Peter's hair had to be cut, and as usual his mother was to be the hairdresser. At
seven twenty-five Peter vanished into his room, and reappeared at the stroke of
seven-thirty, stripped down to his blue swimming trunks and a pair of tennis shoes.
"Are you coming?" he asked his mother.
"Yes, I'll be up in a minute, but I can't find the scissors!"
Peter helped her look, rummaging around in her cosmetics drawer. "Don't make such a
mess, Peter," she grumbled.
I didn't catch Peter's reply, but it must have been insolent, because she cuffed him on
the arm. He cuffed her back, she punched him with all her might, and Peter pulled his
arm away with a look of mock horror on his face. "Come on, old girl!"
Mrs. van D. stayed put. Peter grabbed her by the wrists and pulled her all around the
room. She laughed, cried, scolded and kicked, but nothing helped. Peter led his
prisoner as far as the attic stairs, where he was obliged to let go of her. Mrs. van D.
came back to the room and collapsed into a chair with a loud sigh.
"Die Enifu"hruna der Mutter,". I joked. [* The Abduction of Mother, a possible
reference to Mozart's opera The Abduction from the Seraglio.]
"Yes, but he hurt me."
I went to have a look and cooled her hot, red wrists with water. Peter, still by the
stairs and growing impa- tient again, strode into the room with his belt in his hand,
like a lion tamer. Mrs. van D. didn't move, but stayed by her writing desk, looking for
a handkerchief. "You've got to apologize first."
"All right, I hereby offer my apologies, but only because if I don't, we'll be here till
midnight."
Mrs. van D. had to laugh in spite of herself. She got up and went toward the door,
where she felt obliged to give us an explanation. (By us I mean Father, Mother and
me; we were busy doing the dishes.) "He wasn't like this at home," she said. "I'd
have belted him so hard he'd have gone flying down the stairs [!]. He's never been so
insolent. This isn't the first time he's deserved a good hiding. That's what you get
with a modern upbringing, modern children. I'd never have grabbed my mother like
that. Did you treat your mother that way, Mr. Frank?" She was very upset, pacing
back and forth, saying whatever came into her head, and she still hadn't gone upstairs.
Finally, at long last, she made her exit.
Less than five minutes later she stormed back down the stairs, with her cheeks all
puffed out, and flung her apron on a chair. When I asked if she was through, she
replied that she was going downstairs. She tore down the stairs like a tornado,
probably straight into the arms of her Putti.
She didn't come up again until eight, this time with her husband. Peter was dragged
from the attic, given a merciless scolding and showered with abuse: ill-mannered brat,
no-good bum, bad example, Anne this, Margot that, I couldn't hear the rest.
Everything seems to have calmed down again today!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
P.S. Tuesday and Wednesday evening our beloved Queen addressed the country. She's
taking a vacation so she'll be in good health for her return to the Netherlands.
She used words like "soon, when I'm back in Holland," "a swift liberation," "heroism"
and "heavy burdens."
This was followed by a speech by Prime Minister Gerbrandy. He has such a squeaky
little child's voice that Mother instinctively said, "Oooh." A clergyman, who must have
borrowed his voice from Mr. Edel, concluded by asking God to take care of the Jews,
all those in concentration camps and prisons and everyone working in Germany.
THURSDAY, MAY 11, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Since I've left my entire "junk box" -- including my fountain pen -- upstairs and
I'm not allowed to disturb the grown-ups during their nap time (until two-thirty),
you'll have to make do with a letter in pencil.
I'm terribly busy at the moment, and strange as it may sound, I don't have enough
time to get through my pile of work. Shall I tell you briefly what I've got to do? Well
then, before tomorrow I have to finish reading the first volume of a biography of
Galileo Galilei, since it has to be returned to the library. I started reading it yesterday
and have gotten up to page 220 out of 320 pages, so I'll manage it. Next week I have
to read Palestine at the Cross- roads and the second volume of Galilei. Besides that,
I finished the first volume of a biography of Emperor Charles V yesterday, and I still
have to work out the many genealogical charts I've collected and the notes I've taken.
Next I have three pages of foreign words from my various books, all of which have to
be written down, memorized and read aloud. Number four: my movie stars are in a
terrible disarray and are dying to be straightened out, but since it'll take several days
to do that and Professor Anne is, as she's already said, up to her ears in work, they'll
have to put up with the chaos a while longer. Then there're Theseus, Oedipus, Peleus,
Orpheus, Jason and Hercules all waiting to be untangled, since their various deeds are
running crisscross through my mind like mul- ticolored threads in a dress. Myron and
Phidias are also urgently in need of attention, or else I'll forget entirely how they fit
into the picture. The same applies, for example, to the Seven Years' War and the Nine
Years' War. Now I'm getting everything all mixed up. Well, what can you do with a
memory like mine! Just imagine how forgetful I'll be when I'm eighty!
Oh, one more thing. The Bible. How long is it going to take before I come to the
story of the bathing Susanna? And what do they mean by Sodom and Gomorrah? Oh,
there's still so much to find out and learn. And in the meantime, I've left Charlotte of
the Palatine in the lurch.
You can see, can't you, Kitty, that I'm full to bursting?
And now something else. You've known for a long time that my greatest wish is to be
a journalist, and later on, a famous writer. We'll have to wait and see if these grand
illusions (or delusions!) will ever come true, but up to now I've had no lack of topics.
In any case, after the war I'd like to publish a book called The Secret Annex. It
remains to be seen whether I'll succeed, but my diary can serve as the basis.
I also need to finish "Cady's Life." I've thought up the rest of the plot. After being
cured in the sanatorium, Cady goes back home and continues writing to Hans. It's
1941, and it doesn't take her long to discover Hans's Nazi sympathies, and since Cady
is deeply concerned with the plight of the Jews and of her friend Marianne, they begin
drifting apart. They meet and get back together, but break up when Hans takes up
with another girl. Cady is shattered, and because she wants to have a good job, she
studies nursing. After graduation she accepts a position, at the urging of her father's
friends, as a nurse in a TB sanatorium in Switzerland. During her first vacation she
goes to Lake Como, where she runs into Hans. He tells her that two years earlier
he'd married Cady's successor, but that his wife took her life in a fit of depression.
Now that he's seen his little Cady again, he realizes how much he loves her, and once
more asks for her hand in marriage. Cady refuses, even though, in spite of herself,
she loves him as much as ever. But her pride holds her back. Hans goes away, and
years later Cady learns that he's wound up in England, where he's struggling with ill
health.
When she's twenty-seven, Cady marries a well-to-do man from the country, named
Simon. She grows to love him, but not as much as Hans. She has two daughters and a
son, Lthan, Judith and Nico. She and Simon are happy together, but Hans is always in
the back of her mind until one night she dreams of him and says farewell.
. . .
It's not sentimental nonsense: it's based on the story of Father's life.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
SATURDAY, MAY 13, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
Yesterday was Father's birthday, Father and Mother's nineteenth wedding anniversary,
a day without the cleaning lady. . . and the sun was shining as it's never shone before
in 1944. Our chestnut tree is in full bloom. It's covered with leaves and is even more
beautiful than last year.
Father received a biography of Linnaeus from Mr. Kleiman, a book on nature from Mr.
Kugler, The Canals of Amsterdam from Dussel, a huge box from the van Daans
(wrapped so beautifully it might have been done by a professional), containing three
eggs, a bottle of beer, a jar of yogurt and a green tie. It made our jar of molasses
seem rather paltry. My roses smelled wonderful compared to Miep and Bep's red
carnations. He was thoroughly spoiled. Fifty petits fours arrived from Siemons'
Bakery, delicious! Father also treated us to spice cake, the men to beer and the ladies
to yogurt. Everything was scrumptious!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
TUESDAY, MAY 16, 1944
My dearest Kitty, just for a change (since we haven't had one of these in so long) I'll
recount a little discussion between Mr. and Mrs. van D. last night:
Mrs. van D.: "The Germans have had plenty of time to fortify the Atlantic Wall, and
they'll certainly do everything within their power to hold back the British. It's amazing
how strong the Germans are!"
Mr. van D.: "Oh, yes, amazing.
Mrs. van D.: "It is!"
Mr. van D.: "They are so strong they're bound to win the war in the end, is that what
you mean?"
Mrs. van D.: "They might. I'm not convinced that they won't."
Mr. van D.: "I won't even answer that."
Mrs. van D.: "You always wind up answering. You let yourself get carried away, every
single time."
Mr. van D.: "No, I don't. I always keep my answers to the bare minimum."
Mrs. van D.: "But you always do have an answer and you always have to be right!
Your predictions hardly ever come true, you know!"
Mr. van D.: "So far they have."
Mrs. van D.: "No they haven't. You said the invasion was going to start last year, the
Finns were supposed to have been out of the war by now, the Italian campaign ought
to have been over by last winter, and the Russians should already have captured
Lemberg. Oh no, I don't set much store by your predictions."
Mr. van D. (leaping to his feet): "Why don't you shut your trap for a change? I'll
show you who's right; someday you'll get tired of needling me. I can't stand your
bellyaching a minute longer. just wait, one day I'll make you eat your words!" (End of
Act One.)
Actually, I couldn't help giggling. Mother couldn't either, and even Peter was biting his
lips to keep from laughing. Oh, those stupid grown-ups. They need to learn a few
things first before they start making so many remarks about the younger generation!
Since Friday we've been keeping the windows open again at night.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
What Our Annex Family Is Interested In
(A Systematic Survey of Courses and Readina Matter)
Mr. van Daan. No courses; looks up many things in Knaur's Encyclopedia and Lexicon;
likes to read detective stories, medical books and love stories, exciting or trivial.
Mrs. van Daan. A correspondence course in English; likes to read biographical novels
and occasionally other kinds of novels.
Mr. Frank. Is learning English (Dickens!) and a bit of Latin; never reads novels, but
likes serious, rather dry descriptions of people and places.
Mrs. Frank. A correspondence course in English; reads everything except detective
stories.
Mr. Dussel. Is learning English, Spanish and Dutch with no noticeable results; reads
everything; goes along with the opinion of the majority.
Peter van Daan. Is learning English, French (correspondence course), shorthand in
Dutch, English and German, commercial correspondence in English, woodworking,
economics and sometimes math; seldom reads, sometimes geography.
Margot Frank. Correspondence courses in English, French and Latin, shorthand in
English, German and Dutch, trigonometry, solid geometry, mechanics, phys- ics,
chemistry, algebra, geometry, English literature, French literature, German literature,
Dutch literature, bookkeeping, geography, modern history, biology, economics; reads
everything, preferably on religion and medicine.
Anne Frank. Shorthand in French, English, German and Dutch, geometry, algebra,
history, geography, art history, mythology, biology, Bible history, Dutch literature; likes
to read biographies, dull or exciting, and history books (sometimes novels and light
reading).
FRIDAY, MAY 19, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
I felt rotten yesterday. Vomiting (and that from Anne!), headache, stomachache and
anything else you can imagine. I'm feeling better today. I'm famished, but I think I'll
skip the brown beans we're having for dinner.
Everything's going fine between Peter and me. The poor boy has an even greater need
for tenderness than I do. He still blushes every evening when he gets his good-night
kiss, and then begs for another one. Am I merely a better substitute for Boche? I
don't mind. He's so happy just knowing somebody loves him.
After my laborious conquest, I've distanced myself a little from the situation, but you
mustn't think my love has cooled. Peter's a sweetheart, but I've slammed the door to
my inner self; if he ever wants to force the lock again, he'll have to use a harder
crowbar!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
SATURDAY, MAY 20, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Last night when I came down from the attic, I noticed, the moment I entered the
room, that the lovely vase of carnations had fallen over. Mother was down on her
hands and knees mopping up the water and Margot was fishing my papers off the
floor. "What happened?" I asked with anxious foreboding, and before they could reply,
I assessed the damage from across the room. My entire genealogy file, my notebooks,
my books, everything was afloat. I nearly cried, and I was so upset I started speaking
German. I can't remember a word, but according to Margot I babbled something about
"unlioersehbarer Schaden, schrecklich, entsetzlich, nie zu ersetzen"* [* Incalculable
loss, terrible, awful, irreplaceable.] and much more. Fadier burst out laughing and
Modier and Margot joined in, but I felt like crying because all my work and elaborate
notes were lost.
I took a closer look and, luckily, die "incalculable loss" wasn't as bad as I'd expected.
Up in die attic I carefully peeled apart die sheets of paper diat were stuck togedier
and dien hung diem on die clodiesline to dry. It was such a funny sight, even I had to
laugh. Maria de' Medici alongside Charles V, William of Orange and Marie Antoinette.
"It's Rassenschande,"* Mr. van Daan joked. [An affront to racial purity.]
After entrusting my papers to Peter's care, I went back downstairs.
"Which books are ruined?" I asked Margot, who was going dirough them.
"Algebra," Margot said.
But as luck would have it, my algebra book wasn't entirely ruined. I wish it had fallen
right in the vase. I've never loathed any book as much as that one. Inside the front
cover are the names of at least twenty girls who had it before I did. It's old,
yellowed, full of scribbles, crossed-out words and revisions. The next time I'm in a
wicked mood, I'm going to tear the darned thing to pieces!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
MONDAY, MAY 22,1944
Dearest Kitty,
On May 20, Father lost his bet and had to give five jars of yogurt to Mrs. van Daan:
the invasion still hasn't begun. I can safely say that all of Amsterdam, all of Holland,
in fact the entire western coast of Europe, all the way down to Spain, are talking
about the invasion day and night, debating, making bets and . . . hoping.
The suspense is rising to fever pitch; by no means has everyone we think of as
"good" Dutch people kept their faith in the English, not everyone thinks the English
bluff is a masterful strategical move. Oh no, people want deeds-great, heroic deeds.
No one can see farther than the end of their nose, no one gives a thought to the fact
that the British are fighting for their own country and their own people; everyone
thinks it's England's duty to save Holland, as quickly as possible. What obligations do
the English have toward us? What have the Dutch done to deserve the generous help
they so clearly expect? Oh no, the Dutch are very much mistaken. The English,
despite their bluff, are certainly no more to blame for the war than all the other
countries, large and small, that are now occupied by the Germans. The British are not
about to offer their excuses; true, they were sleeping during the years Germany was
rearming itself, but all the other countries, especially those bordering on Germany,
were asleep too. England and the rest of the world have discovered that burying your
head in the sand doesn't work, and now each of them, especially England, is having to
pay a heavy price for its ostrich policy.
No country sacrifices its men without reason, and certainly not in the interests of
another, and England is no exception. The invasion, liberation and freedom will come
someday; yet England, not the occupied territories, will choose the moment.
To our great sorrow and dismay, we've heard that many people have changed their
attitude toward us Jews. We've been told that anti-Semitism has cropped up in circles
where once it would have been unthinkable. This fact has affected us all very, very
deeply. The reason for the hatred is understandable, maybe even human, but that
doesn't make it right. According to the Christians, the Jews are blabbing their secrets
to the Germans, denouncing their helpers and causing them to suffer the dreadful fate
and punishments that have already been meted out to so many. All of this is true. But
as with everything, they should look at the matter from both sides: would Christians
act any differently if they were in our place? Could anyone, regardless of whether
they're Jews or Christians, remain silent in the face of German pressure? Everyone
knows it's practically impossible, so why do they ask the impossible of the Jews?
It's being said in underground circles that the German Jews who immigrated to Holland
before the war and have now been sent to Poland shouldn't be allowed to return here.
They were granted the right to asylum in Holland, but once Hitler is gone, they should
go back to Germany.
When you hear that, you begin to wonder why we're fighting this long and difficult
war. We're always being told that we're fighting for freedom, truth and justice! The
war isn't even over, and already there's dissension and Jews are regarded as lesser
beings. Oh, it's sad, very sad that the old adage has been confirmed for the umpteenth
time: "What one Christian does is his own responsibthty, what one Jew does reflects
on all Jews."
To be honest, I can't understand how the Dutch, a nation of good, honest, upright
people, can sit in judgment on us the way they do. On us-the most oppressed,
unfortunate and pitiable people in all the world.
I have only one hope: that this anti-Semitism is just a passing thing, that the Dutch
will show their true colors, that they'll never waver from what they know in their
hearts to be just, for this is unjust!
And if they ever carry out this terrible threat, the meager handful of Jews still left in
Holland will have to go. We too will have to shoulder our bundles and move on, away
from this beautiful country, which once so kindly took us in and now turns its back on
us.
I love Holland. Once I hoped it would become a fatherland to me, since I had lost my
own. And I hope so still!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
THURSDAY, MAY 25, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Bep's engaged! The news isn't much of a surprise, though none of us are particularly
pleased. Bertus may be a nice, steady, athletic young man, but Bep doesn't love him,
and to me that's enough reason to advise her against marrying him.
Bep's trying to get ahead in the world, and Bertus is pulling her back; he's a laborer,
without any interests or any desire to make something of himself, and I don't think
that'll make Bep happy. I can understand Bep's wanting to put an end to her
indecision; four weeks ago she decided to write him off, but then she felt even worse.
So she wrote him a letter, and now she's engaged.
There are several factors involved in this engagement. First, Bep's sick father, who
likes Bertus very much. Second, she's the oldest of the Voskuijl girls and her mother
teases her about being an old maid. Third, she's just turned twenty-four, and that
matters a great deal to Bep.
Mother said it would have been better if Bep had simply had an affair with Bertus. I
don't know, I feel sorry for Bep and can understand her loneliness. In any case, they
can get married only after the war, since Bertus is in hiding, or at any rate has gone
underground. Besides, they don't have a penny to their name and nothing in the way
of a hope chest. What a sorry prospect for Bep, for whom we all wish the best. I
only hope Bertus improves under her influence, or that Bep finds another man, one
who knows how to appreciate her!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
THE SAME DAY
There's something happening every day. This morning Mr. van Hoeven was arrested.
He was hiding two Jews in his house. It's a heavy blow for us, not only because
those poor Jews are once again balancing on the edge of an abyss, but also because
it's terrible for Mr. van Hoeven.
The world's been turned upside down. The most decent people are being sent to
concentration camps, prisons and lonely cells, while the lowest of the low rule over
young and old, rich and poor. One gets caught for black marketeering, another for
hiding Jews or other un- fortunate souls. Unless you're a Nazi, you don't know what's
going to happen to you from one day to the next.
Mr. van Hoeven is a great loss to us too. Bep can't possibly lug such huge amounts of
potatoes all the way here, nor should she have to, so our only choice is to eat fewer
of them. I'll tell you what we have in mind, but it's certainly not going to make life
here any more agreeable. Mother says we'll skip breakfast, eat hot cereal and bread
for lunch and fried potatoes for dinner and, if possible, vegetables or lettuce once or
twice a week. That's all there is. We're going to be hungry, but nothing's worse than
being caught.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
FRIDAY, MAY 26, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
At long, long last, I can sit quietly at my table before the crack in the window frame
and write you everything, everything I want to say.
I feel more miserable than I have in months. Even after the break-in I didn't feel so
utterly broken, inside and out. On the one hand, there's the news about Mr. van
Hoeven, the Jewish question (which is discussed in detail by everyone in the house),
the invasion (which is so long in coming), the awful food, the tension, the miserable atmosphere, my disappointment in Peter. On the other hand, there's Bep's
engagement, the Pentecost reception, the flowers, Mr. Kugler's birthday, cakes and
stories about cabarets, movies and concerts. That gap, that enormous gap, is always
there. One day we're laugh- ing at the comical side of life in hiding, and the next day
(and there are many such days), we're frightened, and the fear, tension and despair
can be read on our faces.
Miep and Mr. Kugler bear the greatest burden for us, and for all those in hiding-Miep
in everything she does and Mr. Kugler through his enormous responsibthty for the
eight of us, which is sometimes so overwhelming that he can hardly speak from the
pent-up tension and strain. Mr. Kleiman and Bep also take very good care of us, but
they're able to put the Annex out of their minds, even if it's only for a few hours or
a few days. They have their own worries, Mr. Kleiman with his health and Bep with
her engagement, which isn't looking very promising lat the moment. But they also have
their outings, their visits with friends, their everyday lives as ordinary people, so that
the tension is sometimes relieved, if only for a short while, while ours never is, never
has been, not once in the two years we've been here. How much longer will this
increasingly oppressive, unbearable weight press I down on us?
The drains are clogged again. We can't run the wa- ter, or if we do, only a trickle;
we can't flush the toilet, so we have to use a toilet brush; and we've been putting our
dirty water into a big earthenware jar. We can man- age for today, but what will
happen if the plumber can't fix it on his own? The Sanitation Department can't come
until Tuesday.
Miep sent us a raisin bread with "Happy Pentecost" written on top. It's almost as if
she were mocking us, since our moods and cares are far from "happy."
We've all become more frightened since the van Hoeven business. Once again you hear
"shh" from all I sides, and we're doing everything more quietly. The police forced the
door there; they could just as easily do that here too! What will we do if we're ever.
. . no, I mustn't write that down. But the question won't let itself be pushed to the
back of my mind today; on the contrary, all the fear I've ever felt is looming before
me in all its horror.
I had to go downstairs alone at eight this evening to use the bathroom. There was no
one down there, since they were all listening to the radio. I wanted to be brave, but it
was hard. I always feel safer upstairs than in that huge, silent house; when I'm alone
with those mysterious muffied sounds from upstairs and the honking of horns in the
street, I have to hurry and remind myself where I am to keep from getting the
shivers.
Miep has been acting much nicer toward us since her talk with Father. But I haven't
told you about that yet. Miep came up one afternoon all flushed and asked Father
straight out if we thought they too were infected with the current anti-Semitism.
Father was stunned and quickly talked her out of the idea, but some of Miep's
suspicion has lingered on. They're doing more errands for us now and showing more
of an interest in our troubles, though we certainly shouldn't bother them with our
woes. Oh, they're such good, noble people!
I've asked myself again and again whether it wouldn't have been better if we hadn't
gone into hiding, if we were dead now and didn't have to go through this misery,
especially so that the others could be spared the burden. But we all shrink from this
thought. We still love life, we haven't yet forgotten the voice of nature, and we keep
hoping, hoping for. . . everything.
Let something happen soon, even an air raid. Nothing can be more crushing than this
anxiety. Let the end come, however cruel; at least then we'll know whether we are to
be the victors or the vanquished.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
WEDNESDAY, MAY 31, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Saturday, Sunday, Monday and Tuesday it was too hot to hold my fountain pen, which
is why I couldn't write to you. Friday the drains were clogged, Saturday they were
fixed. Mrs. Kleiman came for a visit in the afternoon and told us a lot about Jopiej
she and Jacque van Maarsen are in the same hockey club. Sunday Bep dropped by to
make sure there hadn't been a break-in and stayed for breakfast. Monday (a holiday
because of Pentecost), Mr. Gies served as the Annex watchman, and Tuesday we
were finally allowed to open the windows. We've seldom had a Pentecost weekend that
was so beautiful and warm. Or maybe "hot" is a better word. Hot weather is horrible
in the Annex. To give you an idea of the numerous complaints, I'll briefly describe
these sweltering days.
Saturday: "Wonderful, what fantastic weather," we all said in the morning. "If only it
weren't quite so hot," we said in the afternoon, when the windows had to be shut.
Sunday: "The heat's unbearable, the butter's melt- ing, there's not a cool spot
anywhere in the house, the bread's drying out, the milk's going sour, the windows
can't be opened. We poor outcasts are suffocating while everyone else is enjoying
their Pentecost." (According to Mrs. van D.)
Monday: "My feet hurt, I have nothing cool to wear, I can't do the dishes in this
heat!" Grumbling from early in the morning to late at night. It was awful.
I can't stand the heat. I'm glad the wind's come up today, but that the sun's still
shining.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
FRIDAY, JUNE 2, 1944 J
Dear Kitty,
"If you're going to the attic, take an umbrella with you, preferably a large one!" This
is to protect you from "household showers." There's a Dutch proverb: "High and dry,
safe and sound," but it obviously doesn't apply to wartime (guns!) and to people in
hiding (cat box!). Mouschi's gotten into the habit of relieving herself on some
newspapers or between the cracks in the floor boards, so we have good reason to fear
the splatters and, even worse, the stench. The new Moortje in the warehouse has the
same problem. Anyone who's ever had a cat that's not housebroken can imagine the
smells, other than pepper and thyme, that permeate this house.
I also have a brand-new prescription for gunfire jitters: When the shooting gets loud,
proceed to the nearest wooden staircase. Run up and down a few times, making sure
to stumble at least once. What with the scratches and the noise of running and falling,
you won't even be able to hear the shooting, much less worry about it. Yours truly
has put this magic formula to use, with great success!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
MONDAY, JUNE 5, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
New problems in the Annex. A quarrel between Dussel and the Franks over the
division of butter. Capitulation on the part of Dussel. Close friendship between the
latter and Mrs. van Daan, flirtations, kisses and friendly little smiles. Dussel is
beginning to long for female companionship.
The van Daans don't see why we should bake a spice cake for Mr. Kugler's birthday
when we can't have one ourselves. All very petty. Mood upstairs: bad. Mrs. van D.
has a cold. Dussel caught with brewer's yeast tablets, while we've got none.
The Fifth Army has taken Rome. The city neither destroyed nor bombed. Great
propaganda for Hitler.
Very few potatoes and vegetables. One loaf of bread was moldy.
Scharminkeltje (name of new warehouse cat) can't stand pepper. She sleeps in the cat
box and does her business in the wood shavings. Impossible to keep her.
Bad weather. Continuous bombing of Pas de Calais and the west coast of France.
No one buying dollars. Gold even less interesting.
The bottom of our black moneybox is in sight. What are we going to live on next
month?
Yours, Anne M. Frank
TUESDAY, JUNE 6, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
"This is D Day," the BBC announced at twelve.
"This is the day." The invasion has begun!
This morning at eight the British reported heavy bombing of Calais, Boulogne, Le
Havre and Cherbourg, as well as Pas de Calais (as usual). Further, as a precautionary
measure for those in the occupied territories, everyone living within a zone of twenty
miles from the coast was warned to prepare for bombardments. Where possible, the
British will drop pamphlets an hour ahead of time.
According to the German news, British paratroopers have landed on the coast of
France. "British landing craft are engaged in combat with German naval units,"
according to the BBC.
Conclusion reached by the Annex while breakfasting at nine: this is a trial landing, like
the one two years ago in Dieppe.
BBC broadcast in German, Dutch, French and other languages at ten: The invasion has
begun! So this is the "real" invasion. BBC broadcast in German at eleven: speech by
Supreme Commander General Dwight Eisenhower.
BBC broadcast in English: "This is 0 Day." General Eisenhower said to the French
people: "Stiff fighting will come now, but after this the victory. The year 1944 is the
year of complete victory. Good luck!"
BBC broadcast in English at one: 11,000 planes are shuttling back and forth or
standing by to land troops and bomb behind enemy lines; 4,000 landing craft and small
boats are continually arriving in the area between Cher- bourg and Le Havre. English
and American troops are already engaged in heavy combat. Speeches by Gerbrandy,
the Prime Minister of Belgium, King Haakon of Norway, de Gaulle of France, the King
of England and, last but not least, Churchill.
A huge commotion in the Annex! Is this really the beginning of the long-awaited
liberation? The liberation we've all talked so much about, which still seems too good,
too much of a fairy tale ever to come true? Will this year, 1944, bring us victory? We
don't know yet. But where there's hope, there's life. It fills us with fresh courage and
makes us strong again. We'll need to be brave to endure the many fears and hardships
and the suffering yet to come. It's now a matter of remaining calm and steadfast, of
gritting our teeth and keeping a stiff upper lip! France, Russia, Italy, and even
Germany, can cry out in agony, but we don't yet have that right!
Oh, Kitty, the best part about the invasion is that I have the feeling that friends are
on the way. Those terrible Germans have oppressed and threatened us for so long that
the thought of friends and salvation means everything to us! Now it's not just the
Jews, but Holland and all of occupied Europe. Maybe, Margot says, I can even go back
to school in October or September.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
P.S. I'll keep you informed of the latest news!
This morning and last night, dummies made of straw and rubber were dropped from
the air behind German lines, and they exploded the minute they hit the ground. Many
paratroopers, their faces blackened so they couldn't be seen in the dark, landed as
well. The French coast was bombarded with 5,500 tons of bombs during the night, and
then, at six in the morning, the first landing craft came ashore. Today there were
20,000 airplanes in action. The German coastal batteries were destroyed even before
the landing; a small bridgehead has already been formed. Everything's going well,
despite the bad weather. The army and the people are "one will and one hope."
FRIDAY, JUNE 9, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Great news of the invasion! The Allies have taken Bayeux, a village on the coast of
France, and are now fighting for Caen. They're clearly intending to cut off the
peninsula where Cherbourg is located. Every evening the war correspondents report on
the difficulties, the courage and the fighting spirit of the army. To get their stories,
they pull off the most amazing feats. A few of the wounded who are already back in
England also spoke on the radio. Despite the miserable weather, the planes are flying
dthgently back and forth. We heard over the BBC that Churchill wanted to land along
with the troops on D Day, but Eisenhower and the other generals managed to talk him
out of it. Just imagine, so much courage for such an old man he must be at least
seventy!
The excitement here has died down somewhat; still, we're all hoping that the war will
finally be over by the end of the year. It's about time! Mrs. van Daan's constant
griping is unbearable; now that she can no longer drive us crazy with the invasion, she
moans and groans all day about the bad weather. If only we could plunk her down in
the loft in a bucket of cold water!
Everyone in the Annex except Mr. van Daan and Peter has read the Hunaarian
Rhapsody trilogy, a biography of the composer, piano virtuoso and child prodigy Franz
Liszt. It's very interesting, though in my opinion there's a bit too much emphasis on
women; Liszt was not only the greatest and most famous pianist of his time, he was
also the biggest womanizer, even at the age of seventy. He had an affair with
Countess Marie d' Agoult, Princess Carolyne Sayn- Wittgenstein, the dancer Lola
Montez, the pianist Agnes Kingworth, the pianist Sophie Menter, the Circassian
princess Olga Janina, Baroness Olga Meyen- dorff, actress Lilla what's-her-name,
etc., etc., and there's no end to it. Those parts of the book dealing with music and the
other arts are much more interesting. Some of the people mentioned are Schumann,
Clara Wieck, Hector Berlioz, Johannes Brahms, Beethoven, Joachim, Richard Wagner,
Hans von Bulow, Anton Rubinstein, Frederic Chopin, Victor Hugo, Honore de Balzac,
Hiller, Hummel, Czerny, Rossini, Cherubini, Paganini, Mendels- sohn, etc., etc.
Liszt appears to have been a decent man, very generous and modest, though
exceptionally vain. He helped others, put art above all else, was extremely fond of
cognac and women, couldn't bear the sight of tears, was a gentleman, couldn't refuse
anyone a favor, wasn't interested in money and cared about religious freedom and the
world.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
314 ANNE FRANK
TUESDAY, JUNE 13, 1944
Dearest Kit,
Another birthday has gone by, so I'm now fifteen. I received quite a few gifts:
Springer's five-volume art history book, a set of underwear, two belts, a handkerchief,
two jars of yogurt, a jar of jam, two honey cookies (small), a botany book from
Father and Mother, a gold bracelet from Margot, a sticker album from the van Daans,
Biomalt and sweet peas from Dussel, candy from Miep, candy and notebooks from Bep,
and the high point: the book Maria Theresa and three slices of full-cream cheese
from Mr. Kugler. Peter gave me a lovely bouquet of peonies; the poor boy had put a
lot of effort into finding a present, but nothing quite worked out.
The invasion is still going splendidly, in spite of the miserable weather -- pouring
rains, gale winds and high seas.
Yesterday Churchill, Smuts, Eisenhower and Arnold visited the French villages that the
British have captured and liberated. Churchill was on a torpedo boat that shelled the
coast. Uke many men, he doesn't seem to know what fear is -- an enviable trait!
From our position here in Fort Annex, it's difficult to gauge the mood of the Dutch.
No doubt many people are glad the idle (!) British have finally rolled up their sleeves
and gotten down to work. Those who keep claim- ing they don't want to be occupied
by the British don't realize how unfair they're being. Their line of reasoning boils
down to this: England must fight, struggle and sacri- fice its sons to liberate Holland
and the other occupied countries. After that the British shouldn't remain in Hol- land:
they should offer their most abject apologies to all the occupied countries, restore the
Dutch East Indies to its rightful owner and then return, weakened and impoverished, to
England. What a bunch of idiots. And yet, as I've already said, many Dutch people can
be counted among their ranks. What would have become of Holland and its neighbors if
England had signed a peace treaty with Germany, as it's had ample opportunity to do?
Holland would have become German, and that would have been the end of that!
All those Dutch people who still look down on the British, scoff at England and its
government of old fogies, call the English cowards, yet hate the Germans, should be
given a good shaking, the way you'd plump up a pillow. Maybe that would straighten
out their jumbled brains!
Wishes, thoughts, accusations and reproaches are swirling around in my head. I'm not
really as conceited as many people think; I know my various faults and shortcomings
better than anyone else, but there's one difference: I also know that I want to change,
will change and already have changed greatly!
Why is it, I often ask myself, that everyone still thinks I'm so pushy and such a
know-it-all? Am I really so arrogant? Am I the one who's so arrogant, or are they?
It sounds crazy, I know, but I'm not going to cross out that last sentence, because it's
not as crazy as it seems. Mrs. van Daan and Dussel, my two chief accusers, are
known to be totally unintelligent and, not to put too fine a point on it, just plain
"stupid"! Stupid people usually can't bear it when others do something better than they
do; the best examples of this are those two dummies, Mrs. van Daan and Dussel. Mrs.
van D. thinks I'm stupid because I don't suffer so much from this ailment as she does,
she thinks I'm pushy because she's even pushier, she thinks my dresses are too short
because hers are even shorter, and she thinks I'm such a know-it-all because she
talks twice as much as I do about topics she knows nothing about. The same goes for
Dussel. But one of my favorite sayings is "Where there's smoke there's fire," and I
readily admit I'm a know-it-all.
What's so difficult about my personality is that I scold and curse myself much more
than anyone else does; if Mother adds her advice, the pile of sermons becomes so
thick that I despair of ever getting through them. Then I talk back and start
contradicting everyone until the old famthar Anne refrain inevitably crops up again:
"No one understands me!"
This phrase is part of me, and as unlikely as it may seem, there's a kernel of truth in
it. Sometimes I'm so deeply buried under self-reproaches that I long for a word of
comfort to help me dig myself out again. If only I had someone who took my feelings
seriously. Alas, I haven't yet found that person, so the search must go on.
I know you're wondering about Peter, aren't you, Kit? It's true, Peter loves me, not as
a girlfriend, but as a friend. His affection grows day by day, but some mysterious
force is holding us back, and I don't know what it is.
Sometimes I think my terrible longing for him was overexaggerated. But that's not
true, because if I'm unable to go to his room for a day or two, I long for him as
desperately as I ever did. Peter is kind and good, and yet I can't deny that he's
disappointed me in many ways. I especially don't care for his dislike of religion, his
table conversations and various things of that nature. Still, I'm firmly convinced that
we'll stick to our agreement never to quarrel. Peter is peace-loving, tolerant and
extremely easygoing. He lets me say a lot of things to him that he'd never accept
from his mother. He's making a determined effort to remove the blots from his
copybook and keep his affairs in order. Yet why does he hide his innermost self and
never allow me access? Of course, he's much more closed than I am, but I know from
experience (even though I'm constantly being accused of knowing all there is to know
in theory, but not in practice) that in time, even the most uncommunicative types will
long as much, or even more, for someone to confide in.
Peter and I have both spent our contemplative years in the Annex. We often discuss
the future, the past and the present, but as I've already told you, I miss the real
thing, and yet I know it exists!
Is it because I haven't been outdoors for so long that I've become so smitten with
nature? I remember a time when a magnificent blue sky, chirping birds, moonlight and
budding blossoms wouldn't have captivated me. Things have changed since I came
here. One night during the Pentecost holiday, for instance, when it was so hot, I
struggled to keep my eyes open until eleven-thirty so I could get a good look at the
moon, all on my own for once. Alas, my sacrifice was in vain, since there was too
much glare and I couldn't risk opening a window. An- other time, several months ago,
I happened to be upstairs one night when the window was open. I didn't go back down
until it had to be closed again. The dark, rainy evening, the wind, the racing clouds,
had me spellbound; it was the first time in a year and a half that I'd seen the night
face-to-face. After that evening my longing to see it again was even greater than my
fear of burglars, a dark rat-infested house or robberies. I went downstairs all by
myself and looked out the windows in the kitchen and private office. Many people
think nature is beautiful, many people sleep from time to time under the starry sky,
and many people in hospitals and prisons long for the day when they'll be free to
enjoy what nature has to offer. But few are as isolated and cut off as we are from
dle joys of nature, which can be shared by rich and poor alike.
It's not just my imagination -- looking at dle sky, dle clouds, dle moon and dle stars
really does make me feel calm and hopeful. It's much better medicine than valerian or
bromide. Nature makes me feel humble and ready to face every blow with courage!
As luck would have it, I'm only able -- except for a few rare occasions-to view
nature through dusty curtains tacked over dirt-caked windows; it takes dle pleasure
out of looking. Nature is dle one thing for which dlere is no substitute!
One of dle many questions that have often bodlered me is why women have been, and
still are, thought to be so inferior to men. It's easy to say it's unfair, but that's not
enough for me; I'd really like to know the reason for this great injustice!
Men presumably dominated women from the very beginning because of their greater
physical strength; it's men who earn a living, beget children and do as they please. . .
Until recently, women silently went along willi this, which was stupid, since the longer
it's kept up, the more deeply entrenched it becomes. Fortunately, education, work and
progress have opened women's eyes. In many countries they've been granted equal
rights; many people, mainly women, but also men, now realize how wrong it was to
tolerate this state of affairs for so long. Modern women want the right to be
completely independent!
But that's not all. Women should be respected as well! Generally speaking, men are
held in great esteem in all parts ofthe world, so why shouldn't women have their
share? Soldiers and war heroes are honored and commemorated, explorers are granted
immortal fame, martyrs are revered, but how many people look upon women too as
soldiers?
In the book Soldiers on the Home Front I was greatly struck by the fact that in
childbirth alone, women commonly suffer more pain, illness and misery than any war
hero ever does. And what's her reward for enduring all that pain? She gets pushed
aside when she's disfigured by birth, her children soon leave, her beauty is gone.
Women, who struggle and suffer pain to ensure the con- tinuation of the human race,
make much tougher and more courageous soldiers than all those big-mouthed
freedom-fighting heroes put together!
I don't mean to imply that women should stop having children; on the contrary, nature
intended them to, and that's the way it should be. What I condemn are our system of
values and the men who don't acknowledge how great, difficult, but ultimately beautiful
women's share in society is.
I agree completely with Paul de Kruif, the author of this book, when he says that men
must learn that birth is no longer thought of as inevitable and unavoidable in those
parts of the world we consider civthzed. It's easy for men to talk -- they don't and
never will have to bear the woes that women do!
I believe that in the course of the next century the notion that it's a woman's duty to
have children will change and make way for the respect and admiration of all women,
who bear their burdens without complaint or a lot of pompous words!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
FRIDAY, JUNE 16, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
New problems: Mrs. van D. is at her wit's end. She's talking about getting shot, being
thrown in prison, being hanged and suicide. She's jealous that Peter confides in me and
not in her, offended that Dussel doesn't re- spond sufficiently to her flirtations and
afraid her husband's going to squander all the fur-coat money on to- bacco. She
quarrels, curses, cries, feels sorry for herself, laughs and starts allover again.
What on earth can you do with such a silly, sniveling specimen of humanity? Nobody
takes her seriously, she has no strength of character, she complains to one and all,
and you should see how she walks around: von hinten Lyzeum, yon vorne Museum.*
[Acts like a schoolgirl, looks like a frump.] Even worse, Peter's becoming insolent,
Mr. van Daan irritable and Mother cynical. Yes, everyone's in quite a state! There's
only one rule you need to remember: laugh at everything and forget everybody else! It
sounds egotistical, but it's actually the only cure for those suffering from self-pity.
Mr. Kugler's supposed to spend four weeks in Alkmaar on a work detail. He's trying
to get out of it with a doctor's certificate and a letter from Opekta. Mr. Kleiman's
hoping his stomach will be operated on soon. Starting at eleven last night, all private
phones were cut off.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
FRIDAY, JUNE 23, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Nothing special going on here. The British have begun their all-out attack on
Cherbourg. According to Pim and Mr. van Oaan, we're sure to be liberated before
October 10. The Russians are taking part in the cam- paign; yesterday they started
their offensive near Vitebsk, exactly three years to the day that the Germans invaded
Russia.
Bep's spirits have sunk lower than ever. We're nearly out of potatoes; from now on,
we're going to count them out for each person, then everyone can do what they want
with them. Starting Monday, Miep's taking a week of vacation. Mr. Kleiman's doctors
haven't found anything on the X rays. He's torn between having an operation and
letting matters take their course.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
TUESDAY, JUNE 27, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
The mood has changed, everything's going enormously well. Cherbourg, Vitebsk and
Zhlobin fell today. They're sure to have captured lots of men and equipment. Five
German generals were killed near Cherbourg and two taken captive. Now that they've
got a harbor, the British can bring whatever they want on shore. The whole Cotentin
Peninsula has been captured just three weeks after the invasion! What a feat!
In the three weeks since D Day there hasn't been a day without rain and storms,
neither here nor in France, but this bad luck hasn't kept the British and the Americans
from displaying their might. And how! Of course, the Germans have launched their
wonder weapon, but a little firecracker like that won't hardly make a dent, except
maybe minor damage in England and screaming headlines in the Kraut newspapers.
Anyway, when they realize in "Krautland" that the Bolsheviks really are getting closer,
they'll be shaking in their boots.
All German women who aren't working for the military are being evacuated, together
with their children, from the coastal regions to the provinces of Groningen, Friesland
and Gelderland. Mussert* [* The leader of the Dutch National Socialist (Nazi) Party]
has announced that if the invasion reaches Holland, he'll enlist. Is that fat pig planning
to fight? He could have done that in Russia long before now. Finland turned down a
peace offer some time ago, and now the negotiations have been broken off again.
Those numbskulls, they'll be sorry!
How far do you think we'll be on July 27?
Yours, Anne M. Frank
FRIDAY, JUNE 30, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Bad weather from one at a stretch to the thirty June* [Anne's English.] Don't I say
that well? Oh yes, I already know a little English; just to prove it I'm reading An
Ideal Husband with the help of a dictionary! War's going wonderfully: Bobruysk,
Mogilev and Orsha have fallen, lots of prisoners.
Everything's all right here. Spirits are improving, our superoptimists are triumphant,
the van Daans are doing disappearing acts with the sugar, Bep' s changed her hair, and
Miep has a week off. That's the latest news!
I've been having really ghastly root-canal work done on one of my front teeth. It's
been terribly painful. It was so bad Dussel thought I was going to faint, and I nearly
did. Mrs. van D. promptly got a toothache as well!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
P.S. We've heard from Basel that Bernd* [Cousin Bernhard (Buddy) Elias]. played the
part of the innkeeper in Minna von Barnhelm. He has "artistic leanings," says Mother.
THURSDAY, JULY 6, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
My blood runs cold when Peter talks about becoming a criminal or a speculator; of
course, he's joking, but I still have the feeling he's afraid of his own weakness.
Margot and Peter are always saying to me, "If I had your spunk and your strength, if
I had your drive and unflagging energy, could. . .
Is it really such an admirable trait not to let myself be influenced by others? Am I
right in following my own conscience?
To be honest, I can't imagine how anyone could say "I'm weak" and then stay that
way. If you know that about yourself, why not fight it, why not develop your
character? Their answer has always been: "Because it's much easier not to!" This
reply leaves me feeling rather discouraged. Easy? Does that mean a life of deceit and
laziness is easy too? Oh no, that can't be true. It can't be true that people are so
readily tempted by ease. . . and money. I've given a lot of thought to what my answer
should be, to how I should get Peter to believe in himself and, most of all, to change
himself for the better. I don't know whether I'm on the right track.
I've often imagined how nice it would be if someone were to confide everything to
me. But now that it's reached that point, I realize how difficult it is to put yourself in
someope else's shoes and find the right answer. Especially since "easy" and "money"
are new and com- pletely alien concepts to me.
Peter's beginning to lean on me and I don't want that, not under any circumstances.
It's hard enough standing on your own two feet, but when you also have to remain
true to your character and soul, it's harder still.
I've been drifting around at sea, have spent days searching for an effective antidote to
that terrible word "easy." How can I make it clear to him that, while it may seem
easy and wonderful, it will drag him down to the depths, to a place where he'll no
longer find friends, support or beauty, so far down that he may never rise to the
surface again?
We're all alive, but we don't know why or what for; we're all searching for happiness;
we're all leading lives that are different and yet the same. We three have been raised
in good famthes, we have the opportunity to get an education and make something of
ourselves. We have many reasons to hope for great happiness, but. . . we have to
earn it. And that's something you can't achieve by taking the easy way out. Earning
happiness means doing good and working, not speculating and being lazy. Laziness may
look inviting, but only work gives you true satisfaction.
I can't understand people who don't like to work, but that isn't Peter's problem either.
He just doesn't have a goal, plus he thinks he's too stupid and inferior to ever achieve
anything. Poor boy, he's never known how it feels to make someone else happy, and
I'm afraid I can't teach him. He isn't religious, scoffs at Jesus Christ and takes the
Lord's name in vain, and though I'm not Orthodox either, it hurts me every time to
see him so lonely, so scornful, so wretched.
People who are religious should be glad, since not everyone is blessed with the ability
to believe in a higher order. You don't even have to live in fear of eternal punishment;
the concepts of purgatory, heaven and hell are difficult for many people to accept, yet
religion itself, any religion, keeps a person on the right path. Not the fear of God, but
upholding your own sense of honor and obeying your own conscience. How noble and
good everyone could be if, at the end of each day, they were to review their own
behavior and weigh up the rights and wrongs. They would automatically try to do
better at the start of each new day and, after a while, would certainly accomplish a
great deal. Everyone is welcome to this prescription; it costs nothing and is definitely
useful. Those who don't know will have to find out by experience that "a quiet
conscience gives you strength!"
Yours, Anne M. Frank
SATURDAY, JULY 8, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Mr. Broks was in Beverwijk and managed to get hold of strawberries at the produce
auction. They arrived here dusty and full of sand, but in large quantities. No less than
twenty-four crates for the office and us. That very same evening we canned the first
six jars and made eight jars of jam. The next morning Miep started making jam for
the office.
At twelve-thirty the outside door was locked, crates were lugged into the kitchen,
with Peter, Father and Mr. van Daan stumbling up the stairs. Anne got hot water from
the water heater, Margot"",went for a bucket, all hands on deck! With a funny feeling
in my stomach, I entered the overcrowded office kitchen. Miep, Bep, Mr. Kleiman, Jan,
Father, Peter: the Annex contingent and the Supply Corps all mixed up together, and
that in the middle of the day! Curtains and windows open, loud voices, banging doors
-- I was trembling with excitement. I kept thinking, "Are we really in hiding?" This
must be how it feels when you can finally go out into the world again. The pan was
full, so I dashed upstairs, where the rest of the family was hulling strawberries around
the kitchen table. At least that's what they were supposed to be doing, but more was
going into their mouths than into the buckets. They were bound to need another
bucket soon. Peter went back downstairs, but then the doorbell rang twice. Leaving the
bucket where it was, Peter raced upstairs and shut the bookcase behind him. We sat
kicking our heels impatiently; the strawberries were waiting to be rinsed, but we stuck
to the house rule: "No running water when strangers are downstairs -- they might
hear the drains."
Jan came up at one to tell us it had been the mail- man. Peter hurried downstairs
again. Ding-dong. . . the doorbell, about-face. I listened to hear if anyone was
coming, standing first at the bookcase, then at the top of the stairs. Finally Peter and
I leaned over the banister, straining our ears like a couple of burglars to hear the
sounds from downstairs. No unfamthar voices. Peter tip- toed halfway down the stairs
and called out, "Bep!"
Once more: "Bep!" His voice was drowned out by the racket in the kitchen. So he ran
down to the kitchen while I nervously kept watch from above. "Go upstairs at once,
Peter, the accountant's here, you've got to leave!" It was Mr. Kugler's voice. Sighing,
Peter came upstairs and closed the bookcase.
Mr. Kugler finally came up at one-thirty. "My gosh, the whole world's turned to
strawberries. I had strawber- ries for breakfast, Jan's having diem for lunch,
Kleiman's eating them as a snack, Miep's bothng them, Bep's hulling them, and I can
smell them everywhere I go. I come upstairs to get away from all that red and what
do I see? People washing strawberries!"
The rest of the strawberries were canned. That evening: two jars came unsealed.
Father quickly turned them into jam. The next morning: two more lids popped up; and
that afternoon: four lids. Mr. van Daan hadn't gotten the jars hot enough when he was
sterthzing them, so Father ended up making jam every evening. We ate hot cereal with
strawberries, buttermilk with strawberries, bread with strawberries, strawberries for
dessert, straw- berries with sugar, strawberries with sand. For two days there was
nothing but strawberries, strawberries, strawberries, and then our supply was either
exhausted or in jars, safely under lock and key.
"Hey, Anne," Margot called out one day, "Mrs. van Hoeven has let us have some peas,
twenty pounds!"
"That's nice of her," I replied. And it certainly was, but it's so much work. . . ugh!
"On Saturday, you've aJI got to shell peas," Mother announced at the table.
And sure enough, this morning after breakfast our biggest enamel pan appeared on the
table, filled to the brim with peas. If you think shelling peas is boring work, you ought
to try removing the inner linings. I don't think many people realize that once you've
pulled out the linings, the pods are soft, delicious and rich in vitamins. But an even
greater advantage is that you get nearly three times as much as when you eat just the
peas.
Stripping pods is a precise and meticulous job that might be suited to pedantic dentists
or finicky spice experts, but it's a horror for an impatient teenager like me. We
started work at nine-thirty; I sat down at ten-thirty, got Up again at eleven, sat
down again at eleven-thirty. My ears were humming with the following refrain: snap
the end, strip the pod, pull the string, pod in the pan, snap the end, strip the pod, pull
the string, pod in the pan, etc., etc. My eyes were swimming: green, green, worm,
string, rotten pod, green, green. To fight the boredom and have something to do, I
chattered all morn- ing, saying whatever came into my head and making everyone
laugh. The monotony was killing me. Every string I pulled made me more certain that
I never, ever, want to be just a housewife!
At twelve we finally ate breakfast, but from twelve-thirty to one-fifteen we had to
strip pods again. When I stopped, I felt a bit seasick, and so did the others. I napped
until four, still in a daze because of those wretched peas.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
SATURDAY, JULY 15,1944
Dearest Kitty,
We've received a book from the library with the challenging title What Do You Think
of the Modern Young Girl? I'd like to discuss this subject today.
The writer criticizes "today's youth" from head to toe, though without dismissing them
all as "hopeless cases." On the contrary, she believes they have it within their power
to build a bigger, better and more beautiful world, but that they occupy themselves
with superficial things, without giving a thought to true beauty. In some passages I
had the strong feeling that the writer was directing her disapproval at me, which is
why I finally want to bare my soul to you and defend myself against this attack.
I have one outstanding character trait that must be obvious to anyone who's known me
for any length of time: I have a great deal of self-knowledge. In everything I do, I
can watch myself as if I were a stranger. I can stand c across from the everyday
Anne and, without being biased or making excuses, watch what she's doing, both the
good and the bad. This self-awareness never leaves me, and every time I open my
mouth, I think, "You should have said that differently" or "That's fine the way it is." I
condemn myself in so many ways that I'm beginning to realize the truth of Father's
adage: "Every child has to raise itself." Parents can only advise their children or point
them in the right direction. Ultimately, people shape their own characters. In addition,
I face life with an extraordinary amount of courage. I feel so strong and capable of
bearing burdens, so young and free! When I first realized this, I was glad, because it
means I can more easily withstand the blows life has in store.
But I've talked about these things so often. Now I'd like to turn to the chapter "Father
and Mother Don't Understand Me." My parents have always spoiled me rotten, treated
me kindly, defended me against the van Daans and done all that parents can. And yet
for the longest time I've felt extremely lonely, left out, neglected and misunderstood.
Father did everything he could to curb my rebellious spirit, but it was no use. I've
cured myself by holding my behavior up to the light and looking at what I was doing
wrong.
Why didn't Father support me in my struggle? Why did he fall short when he tried to
offer me a helping hand? The answer is: he used the wrong methods. He always
talked to me as if I were a child going through a difficult phase. It sounds crazy,
since Father's the only one who's given me a sense of confidence and made me feel
as if I'm a sensible person. But he overlooked one thing: he failed to see that this
struggle to triumph over my difficulties was more important to me than anything else.
I didn't want to hear about "typical adolescent problems," or "other girls," or "you'll
grow out of it." I didn't want to be treated the same as all-the-other-girls, but as
Anne-in-her-own-right, and rim didn't understand that. Besides, I can't confide in
anyone unless they tell me a lot about themselves, and because I know very little
about him, I can't get on a more intimate footing. rim always acts like the elderly
father who once had the same fleeting im- pulses, but who can no longer relate to
me as a friend, no matter how hard he tries. As a result, I've never shared my
outlook on life or my long-pondered theories with anyone but my diary and, once in a
while, Margot. I've hid any- thing having to do with me from Father, never shared my
ideals with him, deliberately alienated myself from him.
I couldn't have done it any other way. I've let myself be guided entirely by my
feelings. It was egotistical, but I've done what was best for my own peace of mind. I
would lose that, plus the self-confidence I've worked so hard to achieve, if I were to
be subjected to criticism halfway through the job. It may sound hard-hearted, but I
can't take criticism from rim either, because not only do I never share my innermost
thoughts with him, but I've pushed him even further away by being irritable.
This is a point I think about quite often: why is it that rim annoys me so much
sometimes? I can hardly bear to have him tutor me, and his affection seems forced. I
want to be left alone, and I'd rather he ignored me for a while until I'm more sure of
myself when I'm talking to him! I'm still torn with guilt about the mean letter I wrote
him when I was so upset. Oh, it's hard to be strong and brave in every way!
. . .
Still, this hasn't been my greatest disappointment. No, I think about Peter much more
than I do Father. I know very well that he was my conquest, and not the other way
around. I created an image of him in my mind, pictured him as a quiet, sweet,
sensitive boy badly in need of friendship and love! I needed to pour out my heart to a
living person. I wanted a friend who would help me find my way again. I accomplished
what I set out to do and drew him, slowly but surely, toward me. When I finally got
him to be my friend, it automatically developed into an intimacy that, when I think
about it now, seems outrageous. We talked about the most private things, but we
haven't yet touched upon the things closest to my heart. I still can't make head or tail
of Peter. Is he superficial, or is it shyness that holds him back, even with me? But
putting all that aside, I made one mistake: I used intimacy to get closer to him, and in
doing so, I ruled out other forms of friendship. He longs to be loved, and I can see
he's beginning to like me more with each passing day. Our time together leaves him
feeling satisfied, but just makes me want to start all over again. I never broach the
subjects I long to bring out into the open. I forced Peter, more than he realizes, to
get close to me, and now he's holding on for dear life. I honestly don't see any
effective way of shaking him off and getting him back on his own two feet. I soon
realized he could never be a kindred spirit, but still tried to help him break out of his
narrow world and expand his youthful horizons.
"Deep down, the young are lonelier than the old." I read this in a book somewhere and
it's stuck in my mind. As far as I can tell, it's true.
So if you're wondering whether it's harder for the adults here than for the children,
the answer is no, it's certainly not. Older people have an opinion about everything and
are sure of themselves and their actions. It's twice as hard for us young people to
hold on to our opinions at a time when ideals are being shattered and destroyed, when
the worst side of human nature predominates, when everyone has come to doubt truth,
justice and God.
Anyone who claims that the older folks have a more difficult time in the Annex
doesn't realize that the problems have a far greater impact on us. We're much too
young to deal with these problems, but they keep thrusting themselves on us until,
finally, we're forced to think up a solution, though most of the time our solutions
crumble when faced with the facts. It's difficult in times like these: ideals, dreams and
cherished hopes rise within us, only to be crushed by grim reality. It's a wonder I
haven't abandoned all my ideals, they seem so absurd and impractical. Yet I cling to
them because I still believe, in spite of everything, that people are truly good at heart.
It's utterly impossible for me to build my life on a foundation of chaos, suffering and
death. I see the world being slowly transformed into a wilderness, I hear the
approaching thunder that, one day, will destroy us too, I feel the suffering of millions.
And yet, when I look up at the sky, I somehow feel that everything will change for
the better, that this cruelty too shall end, that peace and tranquthty will return once
more. In the meantime, I must hold on to my ideals. Perhaps the day will come when
I'll be able to realize them!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
FRIDAY, JULY 21, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
I'm finally getting optimistic. Now, at last, things are going well! They really are!
Great news! An assassination attempt has been made on Hitler's life, and for once not
by Jewish Communists or English capitalists, but by a German general who's not only
a count, but young as well. The Fuhrer owes his life to "Divine Providence": he
escaped, unfortunately, with only a few minor burns and scratches. A number of the
officers and generals who were nearby were killed or wounded. The head of the
conspiracy has been shot.
This is the best proof we've had so far that many officers and generals are fed up
with the war and would like to see Hitler sink into a bottomless pit, so they can
establish a mthtary dictatorship, make peace with the Allies, rearm themselves and,
after a few decades, start a new war. Perhaps Providence is deliberately biding its
time getting rid of Hider, since it's much easier, and cheaper, for the Allies to let the
impeccable Germans kill each other off. It's less work for the Russians and the British,
and it allows them to start rebuilding their own cities all that much sooner. But we
haven't reached that point yet, and I'd hate to anticipate the glorious event. Still,
you've probably noticed that I'm telling the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the
truth. For once, I'm not rattling on about high ideals.
Furthermore, Hitler has been so kind as to announce to his loyal, devoted people that
as of today all mthtary personnel are under orders of the Gestapo, and that any
soldier who knows that one of his superiors was involved in this cowardly attempt on
the Fuhrer's life may shoot him on sight!
A fine kettle of fish that will be. Little Johnny's feet are sore after a long march and
his commanding officer bawls him out. Johnny grabs his rifle, shouts, "You, you tried
to kill the Fuhrer. Take that!" One shot, and the snooty officer who dared to
reprimand him passes into eternal life (or is it eternal death?). Eventually, every time
an officer sees a soldier or gives an order, he'll be practically wetting his pants,
because the soldiers have more say-so than he does.
Were you able to follow that, or have I been skipping from one subject to another
again? I can't help it, the prospect of going back to school in October is making me
too happy to be logical! Oh dear, didn't I just get through telling you I didn't want to
anticipate events? Forgive me, Kitty, they don't call me a bundle of contradictions for
nothing!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
TUESDAY, AUGUST 1, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
"A bundle of contradictions" was the end of my previous letter and is the beginning of
this one. Can you please tell me exactly what "a bundle of contradictions" is? What
does "contradiction" mean? Like so many words, it can be interpreted in two ways: a
contradiction imposed from without and one imposed from within. The former means
not accepting other people's opinions, always knowing best, having the last word; in
short, all those unpleasant traits for which I'm known. The latter, for which I'm not
known, is my own secret.
As I've told you many times, I'm split in two. One side contains my exuberant
cheerfulness, my flippancy, my joy in life and, above all, my abthty to appreciate the
lighter side of things. By that I mean not finding anything wrong with flirtations, a
kiss, an embrace, an off-color joke. This side of me is usually lying in wait to
ambush the other one, which is much purer, deeper and finer. No one knows Anne's
better side, and that's why most people can't stand me. Oh, I can be an amusing clown
for an afternoon, but after that everyone's had enough of me to last a month. Actually,
I'm what a romantic movie is to a profound thinker -- a mere diversion, a comic
interlude, something that is soon forgotten: not bad, but not particularly good either. I
hate haVing to tell you this, but why shouldn't I admit it when I know it's true? My
lighter, more superficial side will always steal a march on the deeper side and
therefore always win. You can't imagine how often I've tried to p:ush away this Anne,
which is only half of what is known as Anne-to beat her down, hide her. But it
doesn't work, and I know why.
I'm afraid that people who know me as I usually am will discover I have another side,
a better and finer side. I'm afraid they'll mock me, think I'm ridiculous and sentimental
and not take me seriously. I'm used to not being taken seriously, but only the
"lighthearted" Anne is used to it and can put up with it; the "deeper" Anne is too
weak. If I force the good Anne into the spotlight for even fifteen minutes, she shuts
up like a clam the moment she's called upon to speak, and lets Anne number one do
the talking. Before I realize it, she's disappeared.
So the nice Anne is never seen in company. She's never made a single appearance,
though she almost always takes the stage when I'm alone. I know exactly how I'd like
to be, how I am . . . on the inside. But unfortunately I'm only like that with myself.
And perhaps that's why-no, I'm sure that's the reason why -- I think of myself as
happy on the inside and other people think I'm happy on the outside. I'm guided by
the pure Anne within, but on the outside I'm nothing but a frolicsome little goat
tugging at its tether.
As I've told you, what I say is not what I feel, which is why I have a reputation for
being boy-crazy as well as a flirt, a smart aleck and a reader of romances. The
happy-go-lucky Anne laughs, gives a flippant reply, shrugs her shoulders and
pretends she doesn't give a darn. The quiet Anne reacts in just the opposite way. If
I'm being completely honest, I'll have to admit that it does matter to me, that I'm
trying very hard to change myself, but that I I'm always up against a more powerful
enemy.
A voice within me is sobbing, "You see, that's what's become of you. You're
surrounded by negative opinions, dismayed looks and mocking faces, people, who
dislike you, and all because you don't listen to the ; advice of your own better half."
Believe me, I'd like ;' to listen, but it doesn't work, because if I'm quiet and serious,
everyone thinks I'm putting on a new act and I have to save myself with a joke, and
then I'm not even talking about my own family, who assume I must be sick, stuff me
with aspirins and sedatives, feel my neck and forehead to see if I have a temperature,
ask about my bowel movements and berate me for being in a bad mood, until I just
can't keep it up anymore, because jj when everybody starts hovering over me, I get
cross, then sad, and finally end up turning my heart inside g out, the bad part on the
outside and the good part on the inside, and keep trying to find a way to become
what I'd like to be and what I could be if . . . if only there were no other people in
the world.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
-----------------------
ANNE'S DIARY ENDS HERE.
-----------------------
AFTERWORD
On the morning of August 4, 1944, sometime between ten and ten-thirty, a car pulled
up at 263 Prinsengracht. Several figures emerged: an SS sergeant, Karl Josef
Silberbauer, in full uniform, and at least three Dutch members of the Security Police,
armed but in civilian clothes. Someone must have tipped them off.
They arrested the eight people hiding in the Annex, as well as two of their helpers,
Victor Kugler and Johannes Kleiman -- though not Miep Gies and Elisabeth (Bep)
Voskuijl-and took all the valuables and cash they could find in the Annex.
After the arrest, Kugler and Kleiman were taken to a prison in Amsterdam. On
September 11, 1944, they were transferred, without benefit of a trial, to a camp in
Amersfoort (Holland). Kleiman, because of his poor health, was released on September
18, 1944. He remained in Amsterdam until his death in 1959.
Kugler managed to escape his imprisonment on March 28, 1945, when he and his
fellow prisoners were being sent to Germany as forced laborers. He immigrated to
Canada in 1955 and died in Toronto in 1989.
Elisabeth (Bep) Voskuijl Wijk died in Amsterdam in 1983.
Miep Santrouschitz Gies is still living in Amsterdam; her husband Jan died in 1993.
Upon their arrest, the eight residents of the Annex were first brought to a prison in
Amsterdam and then transferred to Westerbork, the transit camp for Jews in the north
of Holland. They were deported on September 3, 1944, in the last transport to leave
Westerbork, and arrived three days later in Auschwitz (Poland).
Hermann van Pels (van Daan) was, according to the testimony of Otto Frank, gassed
to death in Auschwitz in October or November 1944, shortly before the gas chambers
were dismantled.
Auguste van Pels (Petronella van Daan) was transported from Auschwitz to
Bergen-Belsen, from there to Buchenwald, then to Theresienstadt on April 9, 1945,
and apparently to another concentration camp after that. It is certain that she did not
survive, though the date of her death is unknown.
Peter van Pels (van Daan) was forced to take part in the January 16, 1945 "death
march" from Auschwitz to Mauthausen (Austria), where he died on May 5, 1945, three
days before the camp was liberated.
Fritz Pfeffer (Albert Dussel) died on December 20, 1944, in the Neuengamme
concentration camp, where he had been transferred from either Buchenwald or
Sachsenhausen.
Edith Frank died in Auschwitz-Birkenau on January 6, 1945, from hunger and
exhaustion.
Margot and Anne Frank were transported from Auschwitz at the end of October and
brought to Bergen Belsen, a concentration camp near Hannover (Germany). The typhus
epidemic that broke out in the winter of 1944-1945, as a result of the horrendous
hygenic conditions, killed thousands of prisoners, including Margot and, a few days
later, Anne. She must have died in late February or early March. The bodies of both
girls were probably dumped in Bergen-Belsen's mass graves. The camp was liberated
by British troops on April 12, 1945.
Otto Frank was the only one of the eight to survive the concentration camps. After
Auschwitz was liberated by Russian troops, he was repatriated to Amsterdam by way
of Odessa and Marseille. He arrived in Amsterdam on June 3, 1945, and stayed there
until 1953, when he moved to Basel (Switzerland), where his sister and her family,
and later his brother, lived. He married Elfriede Markovits Geiringer, originally from
Vienna, who had survived Auschwitz and lost a husband and son in Mauthausen. Until
his death on August 19, 1980, Otto Frank continued to live in Birsfelden, outside
Basel, where he devoted himself to sharing the message of his daughter's diary with
people all over the world.
Project Gutenberg's Essays on Political Economy, by Frederic Bastiat

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Essays on Political Economy

Author: Frederic Bastiat

Release Date: May 31, 2005 [EBook #15962]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ESSAYS ON POLITICAL ECONOMY ***




Produced by Distributed Proofreaders




[Third (People's) Edition]

Essays on Political Economy.

By the late M. Frederic Bastiat,
Member of The Institute of France.

New York:
G. P. Putnams & Sons,
Fourth Avenue, and Twenty-Third Street.
1874.




London:
Printed for Provost and Co.,
Henrietta Street, W. C.




Contents.



Capital and Interest.
  Introduction                                                        1
  Capital and Interest                                                5
  The Sack of Corn                                                   19
  The House                                                          22
  The Plane                                                          24

That Which Is Seen, and That Which Is Not Seen.
  Introduction                                                       49
  The Broken Window                                                  50
  The Disbanding of Troops                                           54
  Taxes                                                              58
  Theatres, Fine Arts                                                63
  Public Works                                                       71
  The Intermediates                                                  74
  Restrictions                                                       83
  Machinery                                                          90
  Credit                                                             97
  Algeria                                                           102
  Frugality and Luxury                                              107
  Work and Profit                                                   116

Government                                                          119

What Is Money?                                                      136

The Law                                                             173




Capital and Interest.



My object in this treatise is to examine into the real nature of the
Interest of Capital, for the purpose of proving that it is lawful, and
explaining why it should be perpetual. This may appear singular, and
yet, I confess, I am more afraid of being too plain than too obscure. I
am afraid I may weary the reader by a series of mere truisms. But it is
no easy matter to avoid this danger, when the facts with which we have
to deal are known to every one by personal, familiar, and daily
experience.

But, then, you will say, "What is the use of this treatise? Why explain
what everybody knows?"

But, although this problem appears at first sight so very simple, there
is more in it than you might suppose. I shall endeavour to prove this by
an example. Mondor lends an instrument of labour to-day, which will be
entirely destroyed in a week, yet the capital will not produce the less
interest to Mondor or his heirs, through all eternity. Reader, can you
honestly say that you understand the reason of this?

It would be a waste of time to seek any satisfactory explanation from
the writings of economists. They have not thrown much light upon the
reasons of the existence of interest. For this they are not to be
blamed; for at the time they wrote, its lawfulness was not called in
question. Now, however, times are altered; the case is different. Men,
who consider themselves to be in advance of their age, have organised an
active crusade against capital and interest; it is the productiveness of
capital which they are attacking; not certain abuses in the
administration of it, but the principle itself.

A journal has been established to serve as a vehicle for this crusade.
It is conducted by M. Proudhon, and has, it is said, an immense
circulation. The first number of this periodical contains the electoral
manifesto of the _people_. Here we read, "The productiveness of capital,
which is condemned by Christianity under the name of usury, is the true
cause of misery, the true principle of destitution, the eternal obstacle
to the establishment of the Republic."

Another journal, _La Ruche Populaire_, after having said some excellent
things on labour, adds, "But, above all, labour ought to be free; that
is, it ought to be organised in such a manner, _that money-lenders and
patrons, or masters, should not be paid_ for this liberty of labour,
this right of labour, which is raised to so high a price by the
traffickers of men." The only thought that I notice here, is that
expressed by the words in italics, which imply a denial of the right to
interest. The remainder of the article explains it.

It is thus that the democratic Socialist, Thor expresses himself:--

"The revolution will always have to be recommenced, so long as we occupy
ourselves with consequences only, without having the logic or the
courage to attack the principle itself. This principle is capital, false
property, interest, and usury, which by the old _rgime_, is made to
weigh upon labour.

"Ever since the aristocrats invented the incredible fiction, _that
capital possesses the power of reproducing itself_, the workers have
been at the mercy of the idle.

"At the end of a year, will you find an additional crown in a bag of one
hundred shillings? At the end of fourteen years, will your shillings
have doubled in your bag?

"Will a work of industry or of skill produce another, at the end of
fourteen years?

"Let us begin, then, by demolishing this fatal fiction."

I have quoted the above, merely for the sake of establishing the fact,
that many persons consider the productiveness of capital a false, a
fatal, and an iniquitous principle. But quotations are superfluous; it
is well known that the people attribute their sufferings to what they
call _the trafficking in man by man_. In fact, the phrase, _tyranny of
capital_, has become proverbial.

I believe there is not a man in the world, who is aware of the whole
importance of this question:--

"Is the interest of capital natural, just, and lawful, and as useful to
the payer as to the receiver?"

You answer, No; I answer, Yes. Then we differ entirely; but it is of the
utmost importance to discover which of us is in the right, otherwise we
shall incur the danger of making a false solution of the question, a
matter of opinion. If the error is on my side, however, the evil would
not be so great. It must be inferred that I know nothing about the true
interests of the masses, or the march of human progress; and that all my
arguments are but as so many grains of sand, by which the car of the
revolution will certainly not be arrested.

But if, on the contrary, MM. Proudhon and Thor are deceiving
themselves, it follows that they are leading the people astray--that
they are showing them the evil where it does not exist; and thus giving
a false direction to their ideas, to their antipathies, to their
dislikes, and to their attacks. It follows that the misguided people are
rushing into a horrible and absurd struggle, in which victory would be
more fatal than defeat; since, according to this supposition, the result
would be the realisation of universal evils, the destruction of every
means of emancipation, the consummation of its own misery.

This is just what M. Proudhon has acknowledged, with perfect good
faith. "The foundation stone," he told me, "of my system is the
_gratuitousness of credit_. If I am mistaken in this, Socialism is a
vain dream." I add, it is a dream, in which the people are tearing
themselves to pieces. Will it, therefore, be a cause for surprise, if,
when they awake, they find themselves mangled and bleeding? Such a
danger as this is enough to justify me fully, if, in the course of the
discussion, I allow myself to be led into some trivialities and some
prolixity.



Capital and Interest.


I address this treatise to the workmen of Paris, more especially to
those who have enrolled themselves under the banner of Socialist
democracy. I proceed to consider these two questions:--

1st. Is it consistent with the nature of things, and with justice, that
capital should produce interest?

2nd. Is it consistent with the nature of things, and with justice, that
the interest of capital should be perpetual?

The working men of Paris will certainly acknowledge that a more
important subject could not be discussed.

Since the world began, it has been allowed, at least in part, that
capital ought to produce interest. But latterly it has been affirmed,
that herein lies the very social error which is the cause of pauperism
and inequality. It is, therefore, very essential to know now on what
ground we stand.

For if levying interest from capital is a sin, the workers have a right
to revolt against social order, as it exists. It is in vain to tell them
that they ought to have recourse to legal and pacific means: it would be
a hypocritical recommendation. When on the one side there is a strong
man, poor, and a victim of robbery--on the other, a weak man, but rich,
and a robber--it is singular enough that we should say to the former,
with a hope of persuading him, "Wait till your oppressor voluntarily
renounces oppression, or till it shall cease of itself." This cannot be;
and those who tell us that capital is by nature unproductive, ought to
know that they are provoking a terrible and immediate struggle.

If, on the contrary, the interest of capital is natural, lawful,
consistent with the general good, as favourable to the borrower as to
the lender, the economists who deny it, the tribunes who traffic in this
pretended social wound, are leading the workmen into a senseless and
unjust struggle, which can have no other issue than the misfortune of
all. In fact, they are arming labour against capital. So much the
better, if these two powers are really antagonistic; and may the
struggle soon be ended! But, if they are in harmony, the struggle is the
greatest evil which can be inflicted on society. You see, then, workmen,
that there is not a more important question than this:--"Is the interest
of capital lawful or not?" In the former case, you must immediately
renounce the struggle to which you are being urged; in the second, you
must carry it on bravely, and to the end.

Productiveness of capital--perpetuity of interest. These are difficult
questions. I must endeavour to make myself clear. And for that purpose I
shall have recourse to example rather than to demonstration; or rather,
I shall place the demonstration in the example. I begin by acknowledging
that, at first sight, it may appear strange that capital should pretend
to a remuneration, and above all, to a perpetual remuneration. You will
say, "Here are two men. One of them works from morning till night, from
one year's end to another; and if he consumes all which he has gained,
even by superior energy, he remains poor. When Christmas comes he is no
forwarder than he was at the beginning of the year, and has no other
prospect but to begin again. The other man does nothing, either with his
hands or his head; or at least, if he makes use of them at all, it is
only for his own pleasure; it is allowable for him to do nothing, for he
has an income. He does not work, yet he lives well; he has everything in
abundance; delicate dishes, sumptuous furniture, elegant equipages; nay,
he even consumes, daily, things which the workers have been obliged to
produce by the sweat of their brow, for these things do not make
themselves; and, as far as he is concerned, he has had no hand in their
production. It is the workmen who have caused this corn to grow,
polished this furniture, woven these carpets; it is our wives and
daughters who have spun, cut out, sewed, and embroidered these stuffs.
We work, then, for him and for ourselves; for him first, and then for
ourselves, if there is anything left. But here is something more
striking still. If the former of these two men, the worker, consumes
within the year any profit which may have been left him in that year, he
is always at the point from which he started, and his destiny condemns
him to move incessantly in a perpetual circle, and a monotony of
exertion. Labour, then, is rewarded only once. But if the other, the
'gentleman,' consumes his yearly income in the year, he has, the year
after, in those which follow, and through all eternity, an income always
equal, inexhaustible, _perpetual_. Capital, then, is remunerated, not
only once or twice, but an indefinite number of times! So that, at the
end of a hundred years, a family which has placed 20,000 francs,[1] at
five per cent., will have had 100,000 francs; and this will not prevent
it from having 100,000 more, in the following century. In other words,
for 20,000 francs, which represent its labour, it will have levied, in
two centuries, a tenfold value on the labour of others. In this social
arrangement, is there not a monstrous evil to be reformed? And this is
not all. If it should please this family to curtail its enjoyments a
little--to spend, for example, only 900 francs, instead of 1,000--it
may, without any labour, without any other trouble beyond that of
investing 100 francs a year, increase its capital and its income in such
rapid progression, that it will soon be in a position to consume as much
as a hundred families of industrious workmen. Does not all this go to
prove that society itself has in its bosom a hideous cancer, which ought
to be eradicated at the risk of some temporary suffering?"

These are, it appears to me, the sad and irritating reflections which
must be excited in your minds by the active and superficial crusade
which is being carried on against capital and interest. On the other
hand, there are moments in which, I am convinced, doubts are awakened in
your minds, and scruples in your conscience. You say to yourselves
sometimes, "But to assert that capital ought not to produce interest, is
to say that he who has created instruments of labour, or materials, or
provisions of any kind, ought to yield them up without compensation. Is
that just? And then, if it is so, who would lend these instruments,
these materials, these provisions? who would take care of them? who even
would create them? Every one would consume his proportion, and the human
race would never advance a step. Capital would be no longer formed,
since there would be no interest in forming it. It would become
exceedingly scarce. A singular step towards gratuitous loans! A singular
means of improving the condition of borrowers, to make it impossible for
them to borrow at any price! What would become of labour itself? for
there will be no money advanced, and not one single kind of labour can
be mentioned, not even the chase, which can be pursued without money in
hand. And, as for ourselves, what would become of us? What! we are not
to be allowed to borrow, in order to work in the prime of life, nor to
lend, that we may enjoy repose in its decline? The law will rob us of
the prospect of laying by a little property, because it will prevent us
from gaining any advantage from it. It will deprive us of all stimulus
to save at the present time, and of all hope of repose for the future.
It is useless to exhaust ourselves with fatigue: we must abandon the
idea of leaving our sons and daughters a little property, since modern
science renders it useless, for we should become traffickers in men if
we were to lend it on interest. Alas! the world which these persons
would open before us, as an imaginary good, is still more dreary and
desolate than that which they condemn, for hope, at any rate, is not
banished from the latter." Thus, in all respects, and in every point of
view, the question is a serious one. Let us hasten to arrive at a
solution.

Our civil code has a chapter entitled, "On the manner of transmitting
property." I do not think it gives a very complete nomenclature on this
point. When a man by his labour has made some useful thing--in other
words, when he has created a _value_--it can only pass into the hands of
another by one of the following modes--as a gift, by the right of
inheritance, by exchange, loan, or theft. One word upon each of these,
except the last, although it plays a greater part in the world than we
may think. A gift needs no definition. It is essentially voluntary and
spontaneous. It depends exclusively upon the giver, and the receiver
cannot be said to have any right to it. Without a doubt, morality and
religion make it a duty for men, especially the rich, to deprive
themselves voluntarily of that which they possess, in favour of their
less fortunate brethren. But this is an entirely moral obligation. If it
were to be asserted on principle, admitted in practice, or sanctioned by
law, that every man has a right to the property of another, the gift
would have no merit--charity and gratitude would be no longer virtues.
Besides, such a doctrine would suddenly and universally arrest labour
and production, as severe cold congeals water and suspends animation;
for who would work if there was no longer to be any connection between
labour and the satisfying of our wants? Political economy has not
treated of gifts. It has hence been concluded that it disowns them, and
that it is therefore a science devoid of heart. This is a ridiculous
accusation. That science which treats of the laws resulting from the
_reciprocity of services_, had no business to inquire into the
consequences of generosity with respect to him who receives, nor into
its effects, perhaps still more precious, on him who gives: such
considerations belong evidently to the science of morals. We must allow
the sciences to have limits; above all, we must not accuse them of
denying or undervaluing what they look upon as foreign to their
department.

The right of inheritance, against which so much has been objected of
late, is one of the forms of gift, and assuredly the most natural of
all. That which a man has produced, he may consume, exchange, or give.
What can be more natural than that he should give it to his children? It
is this power, more than any other, which inspires him with courage to
labour and to save. Do you know why the principle of right of
inheritance is thus called in question? Because it is imagined that the
property thus transmitted is plundered from the masses. This is a fatal
error. Political economy demonstrates, in the most peremptory manner,
that all value produced is a creation which does no harm to any person
whatever. For that reason it may be consumed, and, still more,
transmitted, without hurting any one; but I shall not pursue these
reflections, which do not belong to the subject.

Exchange is the principal department of political economy, because it is
by far the most frequent method of transmitting property, according to
the free and voluntary agreements of the laws and effects of which this
science treats.

Properly speaking, exchange is the reciprocity of services. The parties
say between themselves, "Give me this, and I will give you that;" or,
"Do this for me, and I will do that for you." It is well to remark (for
this will throw a new light on the notion of value) that the second
form is always implied in the first. When it is said, "Do this for me,
and I will do that for you," an exchange of service for service is
proposed. Again, when it is said, "Give me this, and I will give you
that," it is the same as saying, "I yield to you what I have done, yield
to me what you have done." The labour is past, instead of present; but
the exchange is not the less governed by the comparative valuation of
the two services: so that it is quite correct to say that the principle
of _value_ is in the services rendered and received on account of the
productions exchanged, rather than in the productions themselves.

In reality, services are scarcely ever exchanged directly. There is a
medium, which is termed _money_. Paul has completed a coat, for which he
wishes to receive a little bread, a little wine, a little oil, a visit
from a doctor, a ticket for the play, &c. The exchange cannot be
effected in kind, so what does Paul do? He first exchanges his coat for
some money, which is called _sale_; then he exchanges this money again
for the things which he wants, which is called _purchase_; and now,
only, has the reciprocity of services completed its circuit; now, only,
the labour and the compensation are balanced in the same individual,--"I
have done this for society, it has done that for me." In a word, it is
only now that the exchange is actually accomplished. Thus, nothing can
be more correct than this observation of J. B. Say:--"Since the
introduction of money, every exchange is resolved into two elements,
_sale_ and _purchase_. It is the reunion of these two elements which
renders the exchange complete."

We must remark, also, that the constant appearance of money in every
exchange has overturned and misled all our ideas: men have ended in
thinking that money was true riches, and that to multiply it was to
multiply services and products. Hence the prohibitory system; hence
paper money; hence the celebrated aphorism, "What one gains the other
loses;" and all the errors which have ruined the earth, and embrued it
with blood.[2] After much research it has been found, that in order to
make the two services exchanged of equivalent value, and in order to
render the exchange _equitable_, the best means was to allow it to be
free. However plausible, at first sight, the intervention of the State
might be, it was soon perceived that it is always oppressive to one or
other of the contracting parties. When we look into these subjects, we
are always compelled to reason upon this maxim, that _equal value_
results from liberty. We have, in fact, no other means of knowing
whether, at a given moment, two services are of the same value, but that
of examining whether they can be readily and freely exchanged. Allow the
State, which is the same thing as force, to interfere on one side or the
other, and from that moment all the means of appreciation will be
complicated and entangled, instead of becoming clear. It ought to be
the part of the State to prevent, and, above all, to repress artifice
and fraud; that is, to secure liberty, and not to violate it. I have
enlarged a little upon exchange, although loan is my principal object:
my excuse is, that I conceive that there is in a loan an actual
exchange, an actual service rendered by the lender, and which makes the
borrower liable to an equivalent service,--two services, whose
comparative value can only be appreciated, like that of all possible
services, by freedom. Now, if it is so, the perfect lawfulness of what
is called house-rent, farm-rent, interest, will be explained and
justified. Let us consider the case of _loan_.

Suppose two men exchange two services or two objects, whose equal value
is beyond all dispute. Suppose, for example, Peter says to Paul, "Give
me ten sixpences, I will give you a five-shilling piece." We cannot
imagine an equal value more unquestionable. When the bargain is made,
neither party has any claim upon the other. The exchanged services are
equal. Thus it follows, that if one of the parties wishes to introduce
into the bargain an additional clause, advantageous to himself, but
unfavourable to the other party, he must agree to a second clause, which
shall re-establish the equilibrium, and the law of justice. It would be
absurd to deny the justice of a second clause of compensation. This
granted, we will suppose that Peter, after having said to Paul, "Give me
ten sixpences, I will give you a crown," adds, "You shall give me the
ten sixpences _now_, and I will give you the crown-piece _in a year_;"
it is very evident that this new proposition alters the claims and
advantages of the bargain; that it alters the proportion of the two
services. Does it not appear plainly enough, in fact, that Peter asks of
Paul a new and an additional service; one of a different kind? Is it not
as if he had said, "Render me the service of allowing me to use for my
profit, for a year, five shillings which belong to you, and which you
might have used for yourself?" And what good reason have you to maintain
that Paul is bound to render this especial service gratuitously; that he
has no right to demand anything more in consequence of this requisition;
that the State ought to interfere to force him to submit? Is it not
incomprehensible that the economist, who preaches such a doctrine to the
people, can reconcile it with his principle of _the reciprocity of
services_? Here I have introduced cash; I have been led to do so by a
desire to place, side by side, two objects of exchange, of a perfect and
indisputable equality of value. I was anxious to be prepared for
objections; but, on the other hand, my demonstration would have been
more striking still, if I had illustrated my principle by an agreement
for exchanging the services or the productions themselves.

Suppose, for example, a house and a vessel of a value so perfectly equal
that their proprietors are disposed to exchange them even-handed,
without excess or abatement. In fact let the bargain be settled by a
lawyer. At the moment of each taking possession, the shipowner says to
the citizen, "Very well; the transaction is completed, and nothing can
prove its perfect equity better than our free and voluntary consent. Our
conditions thus fixed, I shall propose to you a little practical
modification. You shall let me have your house to-day, but I shall not
put you in possession of my ship for a year; and the reason I make this
demand of you is, that, during this year of _delay_, I wish to use the
vessel." That we may not be embarrassed by considerations relative to
the deterioration of the thing lent, I will suppose the shipowner to
add, "I will engage, at the end of the year, to hand over to you the
vessel in the state in which it is to-day." I ask of every candid man, I
ask of M. Proudhon himself, if the citizen has not a right to answer,
"The new clause which you propose entirely alters the proportion or the
equal value of the exchanged services. By it, I shall be deprived, for
the space of a year, both at once of my house and of your vessel. By it,
you will make use of both. If, in the absence of this clause, the
bargain was just, for the same reason the clause is injurious to me. It
stipulates for a loss to me, and a gain to you. You are requiring of me
a new service; I have a right to refuse, or to require of you, as a
compensation, an equivalent service." If the parties are agreed upon
this compensation, the principle of which is incontestable, we can
easily distinguish two transactions in one, two exchanges of service in
one. First, there is the exchange of the house for the vessel; after
this, there is the delay granted by one of the parties, and the
compensation correspondent to this delay yielded by the other. These two
new services take the generic and abstract names of _credit_ and
_interest_. But names do not change the nature of things; and I defy any
one to dare to maintain that there exists here, when all is done, a
service for a service, or a reciprocity of services. To say that one of
these services does not challenge the other, to say that the first ought
to be rendered gratuitously, without injustice, is to say that injustice
consists in the reciprocity of services,--that justice consists in one
of the parties giving and not receiving, which is a contradiction in
terms.

To give an idea of interest and its mechanism, allow me to make use of
two or three anecdotes. But, first, I must say a few words upon capital.

There are some persons who imagine that capital is money, and this is
precisely the reason why they deny its productiveness; for, as M. Thor
says, crowns are not endowed with the power of reproducing themselves.
But it is not true that capital and money are the same thing. Before the
discovery of the precious metals, there were capitalists in the world;
and I venture to say that at that time, as now, everybody was a
capitalist, to a certain extent.

What is capital, then? It is composed of three things:--

1st. Of the materials upon which men operate, when these materials have
already a value communicated by some human effort, which has bestowed
upon them the principle of remuneration--wool, flax, leather, silk,
wood, &c.

2nd. Instruments which are used for working--tools, machines, ships,
carriages, &c.

3rd. Provisions which are consumed during labour--victuals, stuffs,
houses, &c.

Without these things the labour of man would be unproductive and almost
void; yet these very things have required much work, especially at
first. This is the reason that so much value has been attached to the
possession of them, and also that it is perfectly lawful to exchange and
to sell them, to make a profit of them if used, to gain remuneration
from them if lent.

Now for my anecdotes.



The Sack of Corn.


Mathurin, in other respects as poor as Job, and obliged to earn his
bread by day-labour, became nevertheless, by some inheritance, the owner
of a fine piece of uncultivated land. He was exceedingly anxious to
cultivate it. "Alas!" said he, "to make ditches, to raise fences, to
break the soil, to clear away the brambles and stones, to plough it, to
sow it, might bring me a living in a year or two; but certainly not
to-day, or to-morrow. It is impossible to set about farming it, without
previously saving some provisions for my subsistence until the harvest;
and I know, by experience, that preparatory labour is indispensable, in
order to render present labour productive." The good Mathurin was not
content with making these reflections. He resolved to work by the day,
and to save something from his wages to buy a spade and a sack of corn;
without which things, he must give up his fine agricultural projects. He
acted so well, was so active and steady, that he soon saw himself in
possession of the wished-for sack of corn. "I shall take it to the
mill," said he, "and then I shall have enough to live upon till my field
is covered with a rich harvest." Just as he was starting, Jerome came to
borrow his treasure of him. "If you will lend me this sack of corn,"
said Jerome, "you will do me a great service; for I have some very
lucrative work in view, which I cannot possibly undertake, for want of
provisions to live upon until it is finished." "I was in the same case,"
answered Mathurin, "and if I have now secured bread for several months,
it is at the expense of my arms and my stomach. Upon what principle of
justice can it be devoted to the realisation of _your_ enterprise
instead of _mine?_"

You may well believe that the bargain was a long one. However, it was
finished at length, and on these conditions:--

First--Jerome promised to give back, at the end of the year, a sack of
corn of the same quality, and of the same weight, without missing a
single grain. "This first clause is perfectly just," said he, "for
without it Mathurin would _give_, and not _lend_."

Secondly--He engaged to deliver _five litres_ on _every hectolitre_.
"This clause is no less just than the other," thought he; "for without
it Mathurin would do me a service without compensation; he would inflict
upon himself a privation--he would renounce his cherished enterprise--he
would enable me to accomplish mine--he would cause me to enjoy for a
year the fruits of his savings, and all this gratuitously. Since he
delays the cultivation of his land, since he enables me to realise a
lucrative labour, it is quite natural that I should let him partake, in
a certain proportion, of the profits which I shall gain by the sacrifice
he makes of his own."

On his side, Mathurin, who was something of a scholar, made this
calculation:--"Since, by virtue of the first clause, the sack of corn
will return to me at the end of a year," he said to himself, "I shall be
able to lend it again; it will return to me at the end of the second
year; I may lend it again, and so on, to all eternity. However, I cannot
deny that it will have been eaten long ago. It is singular that I should
be perpetually the owner of a sack of corn, although the one I have lent
has been consumed for ever. But this is explained thus:--It will be
consumed in the service of Jerome. It will put it into the power of
Jerome to produce a superior value; and, consequently, Jerome will be
able to restore me a sack of corn, or the value of it, without having
suffered the slightest injury: but quite the contrary. And as regards
myself, this value ought to be my property, as long as I do not consume
it myself. If I had used it to clear my land, I should have received it
again in the form of a fine harvest. Instead of that, I lend it, and
shall recover it in the form of repayment.

"From the second clause, I gain another piece of information. At the end
of the year I shall be in possession of five litres of corn over the one
hundred that I have just lent. If, then, I were to continue to work by
the day, and to save part of my wages, as I have been doing, in the
course of time I should be able to lend two sacks of corn; then three;
then four; and when I should have gained a sufficient number to enable
me to live on these additions of five litres over and above each, I
shall be at liberty to take a little repose in my old age. But how is
this? In this case, shall I not be living at the expense of others? No,
certainly, for it has been proved that in lending I perform a service; I
complete the labour of my borrowers, and only deduct a trifling part of
the excess of production, due to my lendings and savings. It is a
marvellous thing that a man may thus realise a leisure which injures no
one, and for which he cannot be envied without injustice."



The House.


Mondor had a house. In building it, he had extorted nothing from any one
whatever. He owed it to his own personal labour, or, which is the same
thing, to labour justly rewarded. His first care was to make a bargain
with an architect, in virtue of which, by means of a hundred crowns a
year, the latter engaged to keep the house in constant good repair.
Mondor was already congratulating himself on the happy days which he
hoped to spend in this retreat, declared sacred by our Constitution. But
Valerius wished to make it his residence.

"How can you think of such a thing?" said Mondor to Valerius. "It is I
who have built it; it has cost me ten years of painful labour, and now
you would enjoy it!" They agreed to refer the matter to judges. They
chose no profound economists,--there were none such in the country. But
they found some just and sensible men; it all comes to the same thing;
political economy, justice, good sense, are all the same thing. Now here
is the decision made by the judges:--If Valerius wishes to occupy
Mondor's house for a year, he is bound to submit to three conditions.
The first is to quit at the end of the year, and to restore the house in
good repair, saving the inevitable decay resulting from mere duration.
The second, to refund to Mondor the 300 francs which the latter pays
annually to the architect to repair the injuries of time; for these
injuries taking place whilst the house is in the service of Valerius, it
is perfectly just that he should bear the consequences. The third, that
he should render to Mondor a service equivalent to that which he
receives. As to this equivalence of services, it must be freely
discussed between Mondor and Valerius.



The Plane.


A very long time ago there lived, in a poor village, a joiner, who was a
philosopher, as all my heroes are in their way. James worked from
morning till night with his two strong arms, but his brain was not idle
for all that. He was fond of reviewing his actions, their causes, and
their effects. He sometimes said to himself, "With my hatchet, my saw,
and my hammer, I can make only coarse furniture, and can only get the
pay for such. If I only had a _plane_, I should please my customers
more, and they would pay me more. It is quite just; I can only expect
services proportioned to those which I render myself. Yes! I am
resolved, I will make myself a _plane_."

However, just as he was setting to work, James reflected further:--"I
work for my customers 300 days in the year. If I give ten to making my
plane, supposing it lasts me a year, only 290 days will remain for me to
make my furniture. Now, in order that I be not the loser in this matter,
I must gain henceforth, with the help of the plane, as much in 290 days,
as I now do in 300. I must even gain more; for unless I do so, it would
not be worth my while to venture upon any innovations." James began to
calculate. He satisfied himself that he should sell his finished
furniture at a price which would amply compensate for the ten days
devoted to the plane; and when no doubt remained on this point, he set
to work. I beg the reader to remark, that the power which exists in the
tool to increase the productiveness of labour, is the basis of the
solution which follows.

At the end of ten days, James had in his possession an admirable plane,
which he valued all the more for having made it himself. He danced for
joy,--for, like the girl with her basket of eggs, he reckoned all the
profits which he expected to derive from the ingenious instrument; but,
more fortunate than she, he was not reduced to the necessity of saying
good-bye to calf, cow, pig, and eggs, together. He was building his fine
castles in the air, when he was interrupted by his acquaintance William,
a joiner in the neighbouring village. William having admired the plane,
was struck with the advantages which might be gained from it. He said to
James:--

W. You must do me a service.

J. What service?

W. Lend me the plane for a year.

As might be expected, James at this proposal did not fail to cry out,
"How can you think of such a thing, William? Well, if I do you this
service, what will you do for me in return?"

W. Nothing. Don't you know that a loan ought to be gratuitous? Don't
you know that capital is naturally unproductive? Don't you know
fraternity has been proclaimed. If you only do me a service for the
sake of receiving one from me in return, what merit would you have?

J. William, my friend, fraternity does not mean that all the
sacrifices are to be on one side; if so, I do not see why they should
not be on yours. Whether a loan should be gratuitous I don't know; but I
do know that if I were to lend you my plane for a year it would be
giving it you. To tell you the truth, that was not what I made it for.

W. Well, we will say nothing about the modern maxims discovered by the
Socialist gentlemen. I ask you to do me a service; what service do you
ask me in return?

J. First, then, in a year, the plane will be done for, it will be good
for nothing. It is only just, that you should let me have another
exactly like it; or that you should give me money enough to get it
repaired; or that you should supply me the ten days which I must devote
to replacing it.

W. This is perfectly just. I submit to these conditions. I engage to
return it, or to let you have one like it, or the value of the same. I
think you must be satisfied with this, and can require nothing further.

J. I think otherwise. I made the plane for myself, and not for you. I
expected to gain some advantage from it, by my work being better
finished and better paid, by an improvement in my condition. What reason
is there that I should make the plane, and you should gain the profit? I
might as well ask you to give me your saw and hatchet! What a
confusion! Is it not natural that each should keep what he has made with
his own hands, as well as his hands themselves? To use without
recompense the hands of another, I call slavery; to use without
recompense the plane of another, can this be called fraternity?

W. But, then, I have agreed to return it to you at the end of a year,
as well polished and as sharp as it is now.

J. We have nothing to do with next year; we are speaking of this year.
I have made the plane for the sake of improving my work and condition;
if you merely return it to me in a year, it is you who will gain the
profit of it during the whole of that time. I am not bound to do you
such a service without receiving anything from you in return: therefore,
if you wish for my plane, independently of the entire restoration
already bargained for, you must do me a service which we will now
discuss; you must grant me remuneration.

And this was done thus:--William granted a remuneration calculated in
such a way that, at the end of the year, James received his plane quite
new, and in addition, a compensation, consisting of a new plank, for the
advantages of which he had deprived himself, and which he had yielded to
his friend.

It was impossible for any one acquainted with the transaction to
discover the slightest trace in it of oppression or injustice.

The singular part of it is, that, at the end of the year, the plane came
into James's possession, and he lent it again; recovered it, and lent
it a third and fourth time. It has passed into the hands of his son, who
still lends it. Poor plane! how many times has it changed, sometimes its
blade, sometimes its handle. It is no longer the same plane, but it has
always the same value, at least for James's posterity. Workmen! let us
examine into these little stories.

I maintain, first of all, that the _sack of corn_ and the _plane_ are
here the type, the model, a faithful representation, the symbol of all
capital; as the five litres of corn and the plank are the type, the
model, the representation, the symbol of all interest. This granted, the
following are, it seems to me, a series of consequences, the justice of
which it is impossible to dispute.

1st. If the yielding of a plank by the borrower to the lender is a
natural, equitable, lawful remuneration, the just price of a real
service, we may conclude that, as a general rule, it is in the nature of
capital to produce interest. When this capital, as in the foregoing
examples, takes the form of an _instrument of labour_, it is clear
enough that it ought to bring an advantage to its possessor, to him who
has devoted to it his time, his brains, and his strength. Otherwise, why
should he have made it? No necessity of life can be immediately
satisfied with instruments of labour; no one eats planes or drinks saws,
except, indeed, he be a conjuror. If a man determines to spend his time
in the production of such things, he must have been led to it by the
consideration of the power which these instruments add to his power; of
the time which they save him; of the perfection and rapidity which they
give to his labour; in a word, of the advantages which they procure for
him. Now, these advantages, which have been prepared by labour, by the
sacrifice of time which might have been used in a more immediate manner,
are we bound, as soon as they are ready to be enjoyed, to confer them
gratuitously upon another? Would it be an advance in social order, if
the law decided thus, and citizens should pay officials for causing such
a law to be executed by force? I venture to say, that there is not one
amongst you who would support it. It would be to legalize, to organize,
to systematize injustice itself, for it would be proclaiming that there
are men born to render, and others born to receive, gratuitous services.
Granted, then, that interest is just, natural, and lawful.

2nd. A second consequence, not less remarkable than the former, and, if
possible, still more conclusive, to which I call your attention, is
this:--_Interest is not injurious to the borrower_. I mean to say, the
obligation in which the borrower finds himself, to pay a remuneration
for the use of capital, cannot do any harm to his condition. Observe, in
fact, that James and William are perfectly free, as regards the
transaction to which the plane gave occasion. The transaction cannot be
accomplished without the consent of the one as well as of the other. The
worst which can happen is, that James may be too exacting; and in this
case, William, refusing the loan, remains as he was before. By the fact
of his agreeing to borrow, he proves that he considers it an advantage
to himself; he proves, that after every calculation, including the
remuneration, whatever it may be, required of him, he still finds it
more profitable to borrow than not to borrow. He only determines to do
so because he has compared the inconveniences with the advantages. He
has calculated that the day on which he returns the plane, accompanied
by the remuneration agreed upon, he will have effected more work, with
the same labour, thanks to this tool. A profit will remain to him,
otherwise he would not have borrowed. The two services of which we are
speaking are exchanged according to the law which governs all exchanges,
the law of supply and demand. The claims of James have a natural and
impassable limit. This is the point in which the remuneration demanded
by him would absorb all the advantage which William might find in making
use of a plane. In this case, the borrowing would not take place.
William would be bound either to make a plane for himself, or to do
without one, which would leave him in his original condition. He
borrows, because he gains by borrowing. I know very well what will be
told me. You will say, William may be deceived, or, perhaps, he may be
governed by necessity, and be obliged to submit to a harsh law.

It may be so. As to errors in calculation, they belong to the infirmity
of our nature, and to argue from this against the transaction in
question, is objecting the possibility of loss in all imaginable
transactions, in every human act. Error is an accidental fact, which is
incessantly remedied by experience. In short, everybody must guard
against it. As far as those hard necessities are concerned, which force
persons to burdensome borrowings, it is clear that these necessities
exist previously to the borrowing. If William is in a situation in which
he cannot possibly do without a plane, and must borrow one at any price,
does this situation result from James having taken the trouble to make
the tool? Does it not exist independently of this circumstance? However
harsh, however severe James may be, he will never render the supposed
condition of William worse than it is. Morally, it is true, the lender
will be to blame; but, in an economical point of view, the loan itself
can never be considered responsible for previous necessities, which it
has not created, and which it relieves to a certain extent.

But this proves something to which I shall return. The evident interests
of William, representing here the borrowers, there are many Jameses and
planes, in other words, lenders and capitals. It is very evident, that
if William can say to James,--"Your demands are exorbitant; there is no
lack of planes in the world;" he will be in a better situation than if
James's plane was the only one to be borrowed. Assuredly, there is no
maxim more true than this--service for service. But left us not forget
that no service has a fixed and absolute value, compared with others.
The contracting parties are free. Each carries his requisitions to the
farthest possible point, and the most favourable circumstance for these
requisitions is the absence of rivalship. Hence it follows, that if
there is a class of men more interested than any other in the formation,
multiplication, and abundance of capitals, it is mainly that of the
borrowers. Now, since capitals can only be formed and increased by the
stimulus and the prospect of remuneration, let this class understand the
injury they are inflicting on themselves when they deny the lawfulness
of interest, when they proclaim that credit should be gratuitous, when
they declaim against the pretended tyranny of capital, when they
discourage saving, thus forcing capitals to become scarce, and
consequently interests to rise.

3rd. The anecdote I have just related enables you to explain this
apparently singular phenomenon, which is termed the duration or
perpetuity of interest. Since, in lending his plane, James has been
able, very lawfully, to make it a condition that it should be returned
to him, at the end of a year, in the same state in which it was when he
lent it, is it not evident that he may, at the expiration of the term,
lend it again on the same conditions? If he resolves upon the latter
plan, the plane will return to him at the end of every year, and that
without end. James will then be in a condition to lend it without end;
that is, he may derive from it a perpetual interest. It will be said,
that the plane will be worn out. That is true; but it will be worn out
by the hand and for the profit of the borrower. The latter has taken
into account this gradual wear, and taken upon himself, as he ought, the
consequences. He has reckoned that he shall derive from this tool an
advantage, which will allow him to restore it in its original condition,
after having realised a profit from it. As long as James does not use
this capital himself, or for his own advantage--as long as he renounces
the advantages which allow it to be restored to its original
condition--he will have an incontestable right to have it restored, and
that independently of interest.

Observe, besides, that if, as I believe I have shown, James, far from
doing any harm to William, has done him a _service_ in lending him his
plane for a year; for the same reason, he will do no harm to a second, a
third, a fourth borrower, in the subsequent periods. Hence you may
understand that the interest of a capital is as natural, as lawful, as
useful, in the thousandth year, as in the first. We may go still
further. It may happen that James lends more than a single plane. It is
possible, that by means of working, of saving, of privations, of order,
of activity, he may come to lend a multitude of planes and saws; that is
to say, to do a multitude of services. I insist upon this point,--that
if the first loan has been a social good, it will be the same with all
the others; for they are all similar, and based upon the same
principle. It may happen, then, that the amount of all the remunerations
received by our honest operative, in exchange for services rendered by
him, may suffice to maintain him. In this case, there will be a man in
the world who has a right to live without working. I do not say that he
would be doing right to give himself up to idleness--but I say, that he
has a right to do so; and if he does so, it will be at nobody's expense,
but quite the contrary. If society at all understands the nature of
things, it will acknowledge that this man subsists on services which he
receives certainly (as we all do), but which he lawfully receives in
exchange for other services, which he himself has rendered, that he
continues to render, and which are quite real, inasmuch as they are
freely and voluntarily accepted.

And here we have a glimpse of one of the finest harmonies in the social
world. I allude to _leisure:_ not that leisure that the warlike and
tyrannical classes arrange for themselves by the plunder of the workers,
but that leisure which is the lawful and innocent fruit of past activity
and economy. In expressing myself thus, I know that I shall shock many
received ideas. But see! Is not leisure an essential spring in the
social machine? Without it, the world would never have had a Newton, a
Pascal, a Fenelon; mankind would have been ignorant of all arts,
sciences, and of those wonderful inventions prepared originally by
investigations of mere curiosity; thought would have been inert--man
would have made no progress. On the other hand, if leisure could only be
explained by plunder and oppression--if it were a benefit which could
only be enjoyed unjustly, and at the expense of others, there would be
no middle path between these two evils; either mankind would be reduced
to the necessity of stagnating in a vegetable and stationary life, in
eternal ignorance, from the absence of wheels to its machine--or else it
would have to acquire these wheels at the price of inevitable injustice,
and would necessarily present the sad spectacle, in one form or other,
of the antique classification of human beings into masters and slaves. I
defy any one to show me, in this case, any other alternative. We should
be compelled to contemplate the Divine plan which governs society, with
the regret of thinking that it presents a deplorable chasm. The stimulus
of progress would be forgotten, or, which is worse, this stimulus would
be no other than injustice itself. But no! God has not left such a chasm
in His work of love. We must take care not to disregard His wisdom and
power; for those whose imperfect meditations cannot explain the
lawfulness of leisure, are very much like the astronomer who said, at a
certain point in the heavens there ought to exist a planet which will be
at last discovered, for without it the celestial world is not harmony,
but discord.

Well, I say that, if well understood, the history of my humble plane,
although very modest, is sufficient to raise us to the contemplation of
one of the most consoling, but least understood of the social
harmonies.

It is not true that we must choose between the denial or the
unlawfulness of leisure; thanks to rent and its natural duration,
leisure may arise from labour and saving. It is a pleasing prospect,
which every one may have in view; a noble recompense, to which each may
aspire. It makes its appearance in the world; it distributes itself
proportionably to the exercise of certain virtues; it opens all the
avenues to intelligence; it ennobles, it raises the morals; it
spiritualizes the soul of humanity, not only without laying any weight
on those of our brethren whose lot in life devotes them to severe
labour, but relieving them gradually from the heaviest and most
repugnant part of this labour. It is enough that capitals should be
formed, accumulated, multiplied; should be lent on conditions less and
less burdensome; that they should descend, penetrate into every social
circle, and that by an admirable progression, after having liberated the
lenders, they should hasten the liberation of the borrowers themselves.
For that end, the laws and customs ought all to be favourable to
economy, the source of capital. It is enough to say, that the first of
all these conditions is, not to alarm, to attack, to deny that which is
the stimulus of saving and the reason of its existence--interest.

As long as we see nothing passing from hand to hand, in the character of
loan, but _provisions_, _materials_, _instruments_, things indispensable
to the productiveness of labour itself, the ideas thus far exhibited
will not find many opponents. Who knows, even, that I may not be
reproached for having made a great effort to burst what may be said to
be an open door. But as soon as _cash_ makes its appearance as the
subject of the transaction (and it is this which appears almost always),
immediately a crowd of objections are raised. Money, it will be said,
will not reproduce it self, like your _sack of corn_; it does not assist
labour, like your _plane_; it does not afford an immediate satisfaction,
like your _house_. It is incapable, by its nature, of producing
interest, of multiplying itself, and the remuneration it demands is a
positive extortion.

Who cannot see the sophistry of this? Who does not see that cash is only
a transient form, which men give at the time to other _values_, to real
objects of usefulness, for the sole object of facilitating their
arrangements? In the midst of social complications, the man who is in a
condition to lend, scarcely ever has the exact thing which the borrower
wants. James, it is true, has a plane; but, perhaps, William wants a
saw. They cannot negotiate; the transaction favourable to both cannot
take place, and then what happens? It happens that James first exchanges
his plane for money; he lends the money to William, and William
exchanges the money for a saw. The transaction is no longer a simple
one; it is decomposed into two parts, as I explained above in speaking
of exchange. But, for all that, it has not changed its nature; it still
contains all the elements of a direct loan. James has still got rid of a
tool which was useful to him; William has still received an instrument
which perfects his work and increases his profits; there is still a
service rendered by the lender, which entitles him to receive an
equivalent service from the borrower; this just balance is not the less
established by free mutual bargaining. The very natural obligation to
restore at the end of the term the entire _value_, still constitutes the
principle of the duration of interest.

At the end of a year, says M. Thor, will you find an additional crown
in a bag of a hundred pounds?

No, certainly, if the borrower puts the bag of one hundred pounds on the
shelf. In such a case, neither the plane nor the sack of corn would
reproduce themselves. But it is not for the sake of leaving the money in
the bag, nor the plane on the hook, that they are borrowed. The plane is
borrowed to be used, or the money to procure a plane. And if it is
clearly proved that this tool enables the borrower to obtain profits
which he would not have made without it, if it is proved that the lender
has renounced creating for himself this excess of profits, we may
understand how the stipulation of a part of this excess of profits in
favour of the lender, is equitable and lawful.

Ignorance of the true part which cash plays in human transactions, is
the source of the most fatal errors. I intend devoting an entire
pamphlet to this subject. From what we may infer from the writings of
M. Proudhon, that which has led him to think that gratuitous credit was
a logical and definite consequence of social progress, is the
observation of the phenomenon which shows a decreasing interest, almost
in direct proportion to the rate of civilisation. In barbarous times it
is, in fact, cent, per cent., and more. Then it descends to eighty,
sixty, fifty, forty, twenty, ten, eight, five, four, and three per cent.
In Holland, it has even been as low as two per cent. Hence it is
concluded, that "in proportion as society comes to perfection, it will
descend to zero by the time civilisation is complete. In other words,
that which characterises social perfection is the gratuitousness of
credit. When, therefore, we shall have abolished interest, we shall have
reached the last step of progress." This is mere sophistry, and as such
false arguing may contribute to render popular the unjust, dangerous,
and destructive dogma, that credit should be gratuitous, by representing
it as coincident with social perfection, with the reader's permission I
will examine in a few words this new view of the question.

What is _interest_? It is the service rendered, after a free bargain, by
the borrower to the lender, in remuneration for the service he has
received by the loan. By what law is the rate of these remunerative
services established? By the general law which regulates the equivalent
of all services; that is, by the law of supply and demand.

The more easily a thing is procured, the smaller is the service rendered
by yielding it or lending it. The man who gives me a glass of water in
the Pyrenees, does not render me so great a service as he who allows me
one in the desert of Sahara. If there are many planes, sacks of corn, or
houses, in a country, the use of them is obtained, other things being
equal, on more favourable conditions than if they were few; for the
simple reason, that the lender renders in this case a smaller _relative
service_.

It is not surprising, therefore, that the more abundant capitals are,
the lower is the interest.

Is this saying that it will ever reach zero? No; because, I repeat it,
the principle of a remuneration is in the loan. To say that interest
will be annihilated, is to say that there will never be any motive for
saving, for denying ourselves, in order to form new capitals, nor even
to preserve the old ones. In this case, the waste would immediately
bring a void, and interest would directly reappear.

In that, the nature of the services of which we are speaking does not
differ from any other. Thanks to industrial progress, a pair of
stockings, which used to be worth six francs, has successively been
worth only four, three, and two. No one can say to what point this value
will descend; but we can affirm that it will never reach zero, unless
the stockings finish by producing themselves spontaneously. Why? Because
the principle of remuneration is in labour; because he who works for
another renders a service, and ought to receive a service. If no one
paid for stockings, they would cease to be made; and, with the scarcity,
the price would not fail to reappear.

The sophism which I am now combating has its root in the infinite
divisibility which belongs to _value_, as it does to matter.

It appears at first paradoxical, but it is well known to all
mathematicians, that, through all eternity, fractions may be taken from
a weight without the weight ever being annihilated. It is sufficient
that each successive fraction be less than the preceding one, in a
determined and regular proportion.

There are countries where people apply themselves to increasing the size
of horses, or diminishing in sheep the size of the head. It is
impossible to say precisely to what point they will arrive in this. No
one can say that he has seen the largest horse or the smallest sheep's
head that will ever appear in the world. But he may safely say that the
size of horses will never attain to infinity, nor the heads of sheep to
nothing.

In the same way, no one can say to what point the price of stockings nor
the interest of capitals will come down; but we may safely affirm, when
we know the nature of things, that neither the one nor the other will
ever arrive at zero, for labour and capital can no more live without
recompense than a sheep without a head.

The arguments of M. Proudhon reduce themselves, then, to this:--Since
the most skilful agriculturists are those who have reduced the heads of
sheep to the smallest size, we shall have arrived at the highest
agricultural perfection when sheep have no longer any heads. Therefore,
in order to realise the perfection, let us behead them.

I have now done with this wearisome discussion. Why is it that the
breath of false doctrine has made it needful to examine into the
intimate nature of interest? I must not leave off without remarking upon
a beautiful moral which may be drawn from this law:--"The depression of
interest is proportioned to the abundance of capitals." This law being
granted, if there is a class of men to whom it is more important than to
any other that capitals be formed, accumulate, multiply, abound, and
superabound, it is certainly the class which borrows them directly or
indirectly; it is those men who operate upon _materials_, who gain
assistance by _instruments_, who live upon _provisions_, produced and
economised by other men.

Imagine, in a vast and fertile country, a population of a thousand
inhabitants, destitute of all capital thus defined. It will assuredly
perish by the pangs of hunger. Let us suppose a case hardly less cruel.
Let us suppose that ten of these savages are provided with instruments
and provisions sufficient to work and to live themselves until harvest
time, as well as to remunerate the services of eighty labourers. The
inevitable result will be the death of nine hundred human beings. It is
clear, then, that since 990 men, urged by want, will crowd upon the
supports which would only maintain a hundred, the ten capitalists will
be masters of the market. They will obtain labour on the hardest
conditions, for they will put it up to auction, or the highest bidder.
And observe this,--if these capitalists entertain such pious sentiments
as would induce them to impose personal privations on themselves, in
order to diminish the sufferings of some of their brethren, this
generosity, which attaches to morality, will be as noble in its
principle as useful in its effects. But if, duped by that false
philosophy which persons wish so inconsiderately to mingle with economic
laws, they take to remunerating labour largely, far from doing good,
they will do harm. They will give double wages, it may be. But then,
forty-five men will be better provided for, whilst forty-five others
will come to augment the number of those who are sinking into the grave.
Upon this supposition, it is not the lowering of wages which is the
mischief, it is the scarcity of capital. Low wages are not the cause,
but the effect of the evil. I may add, that they are to a certain extent
the remedy. It acts in this way: it distributes the burden of suffering
as much as it can, and saves as many lives as a limited quantity of
sustenance permits.

Suppose now, that instead of ten capitalists, there should be a hundred,
two hundred, five hundred,--is it not evident that the condition of the
whole population, and, above all, that of the "proltaires,"[3] will be
more and more improved? Is it not evident that, apart from every
consideration of generosity, they would obtain more work and better pay
for it?--that they themselves will be in a better condition, to form
capitals, without being able to fix the limits to this ever-increasing
facility of realising equality and well-being? Would it not be madness
in them to admit such doctrines, and to act in a way which would drain
the source of wages, and paralyse the activity and stimulus of saving?
Let them learn this lesson, then; doubtless, capitals are good for those
who possess them: who denies it? But they are also useful to those who
have not yet been able to form them; and it is important to those who
have them not, that others should have them.

Yes, if the "proltaires" knew their true interests, they would seek,
with the greatest care, what circumstances are, and what are not
favourable to saving, in order to favour the former and to discourage
the latter. They would sympathise with every measure which tends to the
rapid formation of capitals. They would be enthusiastic promoters of
peace, liberty, order, security, the union of classes and peoples,
economy, moderation in public expenses, simplicity in the machinery of
government; for it is under the sway of all these circumstances that
saving does its work, brings plenty within the reach of the masses,
invites those persons to become the formers of capital who were formerly
under the necessity of borrowing upon hard conditions. They would repel
with energy the warlike spirit, which diverts from its true course so
large a part of human labour; the monopolising spirit, which deranges
the equitable distribution of riches, in the way by which liberty alone
can realise it; the multitude of public services, which attack our
purses only to check our liberty; and, in short, those subversive,
hateful, thoughtless doctrines, which alarm capital, prevent its
formation, oblige it to flee, and finally to raise its price, to the
especial disadvantage of the workers, who bring it into operation. Well,
and in this respect is not the revolution of February a hard lesson? Is
it not evident that the insecurity it has thrown into the world of
business on the one hand; and, on the other, the advancement of the
fatal theories to which I have alluded, and which, from the clubs, have
almost penetrated into the regions of the legislature, have everywhere
raised the rate of interest? Is it not evident, that from that time the
"proltaires" have found greater difficulty in procuring those
materials, instruments, and provisions, without which labour is
impossible? Is it not that which has caused stoppages; and do not
stoppages, in their turn, lower wages? Thus there is a deficiency of
labour to the "proltaires," from the same cause which loads the objects
they consume with an increase of price, in consequence of the rise of
interest. High interest, low wages, means in other words that the same
article preserves its price, but that the part of the capitalist has
invaded, without profiting himself, that of the workmen.

A friend of mine, commissioned to make inquiry into Parisian industry,
has assured me that the manufacturers have revealed to him a very
striking fact, which proves, better than any reasoning can, how much
insecurity and uncertainty injure the formation of capital. It was
remarked, that during the most distressing period, the popular expenses
of mere fancy had not diminished. The small theatres, the fighting
lists, the public-houses, and tobacco depots, were as much frequented as
in prosperous times. In the inquiry, the operatives themselves explained
this phenomenon thus:--"What is the use of pinching? Who knows what will
happen to us? Who knows that interest will not be abolished? Who knows
but that the State will become a universal and gratuitous lender, and
that it will wish to annihilate all the fruits which we might expect
from our savings?" Well! I say, that if such ideas could prevail during
two single years, it would be enough to turn our beautiful France into a
Turkey--misery would become general and endemic, and, most assuredly,
the poor would be the first upon whom it would fall.

Workmen! they talk to you a great deal upon the _artificial_
organisation of labour;--do you know why they do so? Because they are
ignorant of the laws of its _natural_ organisation; that is, of the
wonderful organisation which results from liberty. You are told, that
liberty gives rise to what is called the radical antagonism of classes;
that it creates, and makes to clash, two opposite interests--that of the
capitalists and that of the "proltaires." But we ought to begin by
proving that this antagonism exists by a law of nature; and afterwards
it would remain to be shown how far the arrangements of restraint are
superior to those of liberty, for between liberty and restraint I see no
middle path. Again, it would remain to be proved that restraint would
always operate to your advantage, and to the prejudice of the rich.
But, no; this radical antagonism, this natural opposition of interests,
does not exist. It is only an evil dream of perverted and intoxicated
imaginations. No; a plan so defective has not proceeded from the Divine
Mind. To affirm it, we must begin by denying the existence of God. And
see how, by means of social laws, and because men exchange amongst
themselves their labours and their productions, see what a harmonious
tie attaches the classes one to the other! There are the landowners;
what is their interest? That the soil be fertile, and the sun
beneficent: and what is the result? That corn abounds, that it falls in
price, and the advantage turns to the profit of those who have had no
patrimony. There are the manufacturers--what is their constant thought?
To perfect their labour, to increase the power of their machines, to
procure for themselves, upon the best terms, the raw material. And to
what does all this tend? To the abundance and the low price of produce;
that is, that all the efforts of the manufacturers, and without their
suspecting it, result in a profit to the public consumer, of which each
of you is one. It is the same with every profession. Well, the
capitalists are not exempt from this law. They are very busy making
schemes, economising, and turning them to their advantage. This is all
very well; but the more they succeed, the more do they promote the
abundance of capital, and, as a necessary consequence, the reduction of
interest. Now, who is it that profits by the reduction of interest? Is
it not the borrower first, and finally, the consumers of the things
which the capitals contribute to produce?

It is therefore certain that the final result of the efforts of each
class is the common good of all.

You are told that capital tyrannises over labour. I do not deny that
each one endeavours to draw the greatest possible advantage from his
situation; but, in this sense, he realises only that which is possible.
Now, it is never more possible for capitals to tyrannise over labour,
than when they are scarce; for then it is they who make the law--it is
they who regulate the rate of sale. Never is this tyranny more
impossible to them, than when they are abundant; for, in that case, it
is labour which has the command.

Away, then, with the jealousies of classes, ill-will, unfounded hatreds,
unjust suspicions. These depraved passions injure those who nourish them
in their hearts. This is no declamatory morality; it is a chain of
causes and effects, which is capable of being rigorously, mathematically
demonstrated. It is not the less sublime, in that it satisfies the
intellect as well as the feelings.

I shall sum up this whole dissertation with these words:--Workmen,
labourers, "proltaires," destitute and suffering classes, will you
improve your condition? You will not succeed by strife, insurrection,
hatred, and error. But there are three things which cannot perfect the
entire community, without extending these benefits to yourselves; these
things are--peace, liberty, and security.




That Which Is Seen, and That Which Is Not Seen



In the department of economy, an act, a habit, an institution, a law,
gives birth not only to an effect, but to a series of effects. Of these
effects, the first only is immediate; it manifests itself simultaneously
with its cause--_it is seen_. The others unfold in succession--_they are
not seen_: it is well for us if they are _foreseen_. Between a good and
a bad economist this constitutes the whole difference--the one takes
account of the _visible_ effect; the other takes account both of the
effects which are _seen_ and also of those which it is necessary to
_foresee_. Now this difference is enormous, for it almost always happens
that when the immediate consequence is favourable, the ultimate
consequences are fatal, _and the converse_. Hence it follows that the
bad economist pursues a small present good, which will be followed by a
great evil to come, while the true economist pursues a great good to
come, at the risk of a small present evil.

In fact, it is the same in the science of health, arts, and in that of
morals. If often happens, that the sweeter the first fruit of a habit
is, the more bitter are the consequences. Take, for example, debauchery,
idleness, prodigality. When, therefore, a man, absorbed in the effect
which _is seen_, has not yet learned to discern those which are not
seen, he gives way to fatal habits, not only by inclination, but by
calculation.

This explains the fatally grievous condition of mankind. Ignorance
surrounds its cradle: then its actions are determined by their first
consequences, the only ones which, in its first stage, it can see. It is
only in the long run that it learns to take account of the others. It
has to learn this lesson from two very different masters--experience and
foresight. Experience teaches effectually, but brutally. It makes us
acquainted with all the effects of an action, by causing us to feel
them; and we cannot fail to finish by knowing that fire burns, if we
have burned ourselves. For this rough teacher, I should like, if
possible, to substitute a more gentle one. I mean Foresight. For this
purpose I shall examine the consequences of certain economical
phenomena, by placing in opposition to each other those _which are
seen_, and those _which are not seen_.



I.--The Broken Window.


Have you ever witnessed the anger of the good shopkeeper, James B., when
his careless son happened to break a pane of glass? If you have been
present at such a scene, you will most assuredly bear witness to the
fact, that every one of the spectators, were there even thirty of them,
by common consent apparently, offered the unfortunate owner this
invariable consolation--"It is an ill wind that blows nobody good.
Everybody must live, and what would become of the glaziers if panes of
glass were never broken?"

Now, this form of condolence contains an entire theory, which it will be
well to show up in this simple case, seeing that it is precisely the
same as that which, unhappily, regulates the greater part of our
economical institutions.

Suppose it cost six francs to repair the damage, and you say that the
accident brings six francs to the glazier's trade--that it encourages
that trade to the amount of six francs--I grant it; I have not a word to
say against it; you reason justly. The glazier comes, performs his task,
receives his six francs, rubs his hands, and, in his heart, blesses the
careless child. All this is _that which is seen_.

But if, on the other hand, you come to the conclusion, as is too often
the case, that it is a good thing to break windows, that it causes money
to circulate, and that the encouragement of industry in general will be
the result of it, you will oblige me to call out, "Stop there! your
theory is confined to that _which is seen_; it takes no account of that
_which is not seen_."

_It is not seen_ that as our shopkeeper has spent six francs upon one
thing, he cannot spend them upon another. _It is not seen_ that if he
had not had a window to replace, he would, perhaps, have replaced his
old shoes, or added another book to his library. In short, he would have
employed his six francs in some way which this accident has prevented.

Let us take a view of industry in general, as affected by this
circumstance. The window being broken, the glazier's trade is encouraged
to the amount of six francs: _this is that which is seen_.

If the window had not been broken, the shoemaker's trade (or some other)
would have been encouraged to the amount of six francs: this is _that
which is not seen_.

And if _that which is not seen_ is taken into consideration, because it
is a negative fact, as well as that which is seen, because it is a
positive fact, it will be understood that neither industry _in general_,
nor the sum total of _national labour_, is affected, whether windows are
broken or not.

Now let us consider James B. himself. In the former supposition, that of
the window being broken, he spends six francs, and has neither more nor
less than he had before, the enjoyment of a window.

In the second, where we suppose the window not to have been broken, he
would have spent six francs in shoes, and would have had at the same
time the enjoyment of a pair o shoes and of a window.

Now, as James B. forms a part of society, we must come to the
conclusion, that, taking it altogether, and making an estimate of its
enjoyments and its labours, it has lost the value of the broken window.

Whence we arrive at this unexpected conclusion: "Society loses the value
of things which are uselessly destroyed;" and we must assent to a maxim
which will make the hair of protectionists stand on end--To break, to
spoil, to waste, is not to encourage national labour; or, more briefly,
"destruction is not profit."

What will you say, _Moniteur Industriel_--what will you say, disciples
of good M. F. Chamans, who has calculated with so much precision how
much trade would gain by the burning of Paris, from the number of houses
it would be necessary to rebuild?

I am sorry to disturb these ingenious calculations, as far as their
spirit has been introduced into our legislation; but I beg him to begin
them again, by taking into the account _that which is not seen_, and
placing it alongside of _that which is seen_.

The reader must take care to remember that there are not two persons
only, but three concerned in the little scene which I have submitted to
his attention. One of them, James B., represents the consumer, reduced,
by an act of destruction, to one enjoyment instead of two. Another,
under the title of the glazier, shows us the producer, whose trade is
encouraged by the accident. The third is the shoemaker (or some other
tradesman), whose labour suffers proportionably by the same cause. It
is this third person who is always kept in the shade, and who,
personating _that which is not seen_, is a necessary element of the
problem. It is he who shows us how absurd it is to think we see a profit
in an act of destruction. It is he who will soon teach us that it is not
less absurd to see a profit in a restriction, which is, after all,
nothing else than a partial destruction. Therefore, if you will only go
to the root of all the arguments which are adduced in its favour, all
you will find will be the paraphrase of this vulgar saying--_What would
become of the glaziers, if nobody ever broke windows_?



II.--The Disbanding of Troops.


It is the same with a people as it is with a man. If it wishes to give
itself some gratification, it naturally considers whether it is worth
what it costs. To a nation, security is the greatest of advantages. If,
in order to obtain it, it is necessary to have an army of a hundred
thousand men, I have nothing to say against it. It is an enjoyment
bought by a sacrifice. Let me not be misunderstood upon the extent of my
position. A member of the assembly proposes to disband a hundred
thousand men, for the sake of relieving the tax-payers of a hundred
millions.

If we confine ourselves to this answer--"The hundred millions of men,
and these hundred millions of money, are indispensable to the national
security: it is a sacrifice; but without this sacrifice, France would
be torn by factions or invaded by some foreign power,"--I have nothing
to object to this argument, which may be true or false in fact, but
which theoretically contains nothing which militates against economy.
The error begins when the sacrifice itself is said to be an advantage
because it profits somebody.

Now I am very much mistaken if, the moment the author of the proposal
has taken his seat, some orator will not rise and say--"Disband a
hundred thousand men! Do you know what you are saying? What will become
of them? Where will they get a living? Don't you know that work is
scarce everywhere? That every field is over-stocked? Would you turn them
out of doors to increase competition and to weigh upon the rate of
wages? Just now, when it is a hard matter to live at all, it would be a
pretty thing if the State must find bread for a hundred thousand
individuals? Consider, besides, that the army consumes wine, arms,
clothing--that it promotes the activity of manufactures in garrison
towns--that it is, in short, the godsend of innumerable purveyors. Why,
any one must tremble at the bare idea of doing away with this immense
industrial movement."

This discourse, it is evident, concludes by voting the maintenance of a
hundred thousand soldiers, for reasons drawn from the necessity of the
service, and from economical considerations. It is these considerations
only that I have to refute.

A hundred thousand men, costing the tax-payers a hundred millions of
money, live and bring to the purveyors as much as a hundred millions can
supply. This is that _which is seen_.

But, a hundred millions taken from the pockets of the tax-payers, cease
to maintain these tax-payers and the purveyors, as far as a hundred
millions reach. This is _that which is not seen_. Now make your
calculations. Cast up, and tell me what profit there is for the masses?

I will tell you where the _loss_ lies; and to simplify it, instead of
speaking of a hundred thousand men and a million of money, it shall be
of one man and a thousand francs.

We will suppose that we are in the village of A. The recruiting
sergeants go their round, and take off a man. The tax-gatherers go their
round, and take off a thousand francs. The man and the sum of money are
taken to Metz, and the latter is destined to support the former for a
year without doing anything. If you consider Metz only, you are quite
right; the measure is a very advantageous one: but if you look towards
the village of A., you will judge very differently; for, unless you are
very blind indeed, you will see that that village has lost a worker, and
the thousand francs which would remunerate his labour, as well as the
activity which, by the expenditure of those thousand francs, it would
spread around it.

At first sight, there would seem to be some compensation. What took
place at the village, now takes place at Metz, that is all. But the
loss is to be estimated in this way:--At the village, a man dug and
worked; he was a worker. At Metz, he turns to the right about and to the
left about; he is a soldier. The money and the circulation are the same
in both cases; but in the one there were three hundred days of
productive labour, in the other there are three hundred days of
unproductive labour, supposing, of course, that a part of the army is
not indispensable to the public safety.

Now, suppose the disbanding to take place. You tell me there will be a
surplus of a hundred thousand workers, that competition will be
stimulated, and it will reduce the rate of wages. This is what you see.

But what you do not see is this. You do not see that to dismiss a
hundred thousand soldiers is not to do away with a million of money, but
to return it to the tax-payers. You do not see that to throw a hundred
thousand workers on the market, is to throw into it, at the same moment,
the hundred millions of money needed to pay for their labour: that,
consequently, the same act which increases the supply of hands,
increases also the demand; from which it follows, that your fear of a
reduction of wages is unfounded. You do not see that, before the
disbanding as well as after it, there are in the country a hundred
millions of money corresponding with the hundred thousand men. That the
whole difference consists in this: before the disbanding, the country
gave the hundred millions to the hundred thousand men for doing nothing;
and that after it, it pays them the same sum for working. You do not
see, in short, that when a tax-payer gives his money either to a soldier
in exchange for nothing, or to a worker in exchange for something, all
the ultimate consequences of the circulation of this money are the same
in the two cases; only, in the second case the tax-payer receives
something, in the former he receives nothing. The result is--a dead loss
to the nation.

The sophism which I am here combating will not stand the test of
progression, which is the touchstone of principles. If, when every
compensation is made, and all interests satisfied, there is a _national
profit_ in increasing the army, why not enrol under its banners the
entire male population of the country?



III.--Taxes.


Have you never chanced to hear it said: "There is no better investment
than taxes. Only see what a number of families it maintains, and
consider how it reacts upon industry: it is an inexhaustible stream, it
is life itself."

In order to combat this doctrine, I must refer to my preceding
refutation. Political economy knew well enough that its arguments were
not so amusing that it could be said of them, _repetitions please_. It
has, therefore, turned the proverb to its own use, well convinced that,
in its mouth, _repetitions teach_.

The advantages which officials advocate are _those which are seen_. The
benefit which accrues to the providers _is still that which is seen_.
This blinds all eyes.

But the disadvantages which the tax-payers have to get rid of are _those
which are not seen_. And the injury which results from it to the
providers is still that _which is not seen_, although this ought to be
self-evident.

When an official spends for his own profit an extra hundred sous, it
implies that a tax-payer spends for his profit a hundred sous less. But
the expense of the official _is seen_, because the act is performed,
while that of the tax-payer _is not seen_, because, alas! he is
prevented from performing it.

You compare the nation, perhaps to a parched tract of land, and the tax
to a fertilising rain. Be it so. But you ought also to ask yourself
where are the sources of this rain, and whether it is not the tax itself
which draws away the moisture from the ground and dries it up?

Again, you ought to ask yourself whether it is possible that the soil
can receive as much of this precious water by rain as it loses by
evaporation?

There is one thing very certain, that when James B. counts out a hundred
sous for the tax-gatherer, he receives nothing in return. Afterwards,
when an official spends these hundred sous, and returns them to James
B., it is for an equal value in corn or labour. The final result is a
loss to James B. of five francs.

It is very true that often, perhaps very often, the official performs
for James B. an equivalent service. In this case there is no loss on
either side; there is merely an exchange. Therefore, my arguments do not
at all apply to useful functionaries. All I say is,--if you wish to
create an office, prove its utility. Show that its value to James B., by
the services which it performs for him, is equal to what it costs him.
But, apart from this intrinsic utility, do not bring forward as an
argument the benefit which it confers upon the official, his family, and
his providers; do not assert that it encourages labour.

When James B. gives a hundred sous to a Government officer for a really
useful service, it is exactly the same as when he gives a hundred sous
to a shoemaker for a pair of shoes.

But when James B. gives a hundred sous to a Government officer, and
receives nothing for them unless it be annoyances, he might as well give
them to a thief. It is nonsense to say that the Government officer will
spend these hundred sous to the great profit of _national labour_; the
thief would do the same; and so would James B., if he had not been
stopped on the road by the extra-legal parasite, nor by the lawful
sponger.

Let us accustom ourselves, then, to avoid judging of things by _what is
seen_ only, but to judge of them by _that which is not seen_.

Last year I was on the Committee of Finance, for under the constituency
the members of the Opposition were not systematically excluded from all
the Commissions: in that the constituency acted wisely. We have heard M.
Thiers say--"I have passed my life in opposing the legitimist party and
the priest party. Since the common danger has brought us together, now
that I associate with them and know them, and now that we speak face to
face, I have found out that they are not the monsters I used to imagine
them."

Yes, distrust is exaggerated, hatred is fostered among parties who never
mix; and if the majority would allow the minority to be present at the
Commissions, it would perhaps be discovered that the ideas of the
different sides are not so far removed from each other; and, above all,
that their intentions are not so perverse as is supposed. However, last
year I was on the Committee of Finance. Every time that one of our
colleagues spoke of fixing at a moderate figure the maintenance of the
President of the Republic, that of the ministers, and of the
ambassadors, it was answered:--

"For the good of the service, it is necessary to surround certain
offices with splendour and dignity, as a means of attracting men of
merit to them. A vast number of unfortunate persons apply to the
President of the Republic, and it would be placing him in a very painful
position to oblige him to be constantly refusing them. A certain style
in the ministerial saloons is a part of the machinery of constitutional
Governments."

Although such arguments may be controverted, they certainly deserve a
serious examination. They are based upon the public interest, whether
rightly estimated or not; and as far as I am concerned, I have much more
respect for them than many of our Catos have, who are actuated by a
narrow spirit of parsimony or of jealousy.

But what revolts the economical part of my conscience, and makes me
blush for the intellectual resources of my country, is when this absurd
relic of feudalism is brought forward, which it constantly is, and it is
favourably received too:--

"Besides, the luxury of great Government officers encourages the arts,
industry, and labour. The head of the State and his ministers cannot
give banquets and soires without causing life to circulate through all
the veins of the social body. To reduce their means, would starve
Parisian industry, and consequently that of the whole nation."

I must beg you, gentlemen, to pay some little regard to arithmetic, at
least; and not to say before the National Assembly in France, lest to
its shame it should agree with you, that an addition gives a different
sum, according to whether it is added up from the bottom to the top, or
from the top to the bottom of the column.

For instance, I want to agree with a drainer to make a trench in my
field for a hundred sous. Just as we have concluded our arrangement the
tax-gatherer comes, takes my hundred sous, and sends them to the
Minister of the Interior; my bargain is at end, but the minister will
have another dish added to his table. Upon what ground will you dare to
affirm that this official expense helps the national industry? Do you
not see, that in this there is only a reversing of satisfaction and
labour? A minister has his table better covered, it is true; but it is
just as true that an agriculturist has his field worse drained. A
Parisian tavern-keeper has gained a hundred sous, I grant you; but then
you must grant me that a drainer has been prevented from gaining five
francs. It all comes to this,--that the official and the tavern-keeper
being satisfied, is _that which is seen_; the field undrained, and the
drainer deprived of his job, is _that which is not seen_. Dear me! how
much trouble there is in proving that two and two make four; and if you
succeed in proving it, it is said "the thing is so plain it is quite
tiresome," and they vote as if you had proved nothing at all.



IV.--Theatres, Fine Arts.


Ought the State to support the arts?

There is certainly much to be said on both sides of this question. It
may be said, in favour of the system of voting supplies for this
purpose, that the arts enlarge, elevate, and harmonize the soul of a
nation; that they divert it from too great an absorption in material
occupations; encourage in it a love for the beautiful; and thus act
favourably on its manners, customs, morals, and even on its industry. It
may be asked, what would become of music in France without her Italian
theatre and her Conservatoire; of the dramatic art, without her
Thtre-Franais; of painting and sculpture, without our collections,
galleries, and museums? It might even be asked, whether, without
centralisation, and consequently the support of the fine arts, that
exquisite taste would be developed which is the noble appendage of
French labour, and which introduces its productions to the whole world?
In the face of such results, would it not be the height of imprudence to
renounce this moderate contribution from all her citizens, which, in
fact, in the eyes of Europe, realises their superiority and their glory?

To these and many other reasons, whose force I do not dispute, arguments
no less forcible may be opposed. It might first of all be said, that
there is a question of distributive justice in it. Does the right of the
legislator extend to abridging the wages of the artisan, for the sake
of, adding to the profits of the artist? M. Lamartine said, "If you
cease to support the theatre, where will you stop? Will you not
necessarily be led to withdraw your support from your colleges, your
museums, your institutes, and your libraries? It might be answered, if
you desire to support everything which is good and useful, where will
you stop? Will you not necessarily be led to form a civil list for
agriculture, industry, commerce, benevolence, education? Then, is it
certain that Government aid favours the progress of art? This question
is far from being settled, and we see very well that the theatres which
prosper are those which depend upon their own resources. Moreover, if we
come to higher considerations, we may observe that wants and desires
arise the one from the other, and originate in regions which are more
and more refined in proportion as the public wealth allows of their
being satisfied; that Government ought not to take part in this
correspondence, because in a certain condition of present fortune it
could not by taxation stimulate the arts of necessity without checking
those of luxury, and thus interrupting the natural course of
civilisation. I may observe, that these artificial transpositions of
wants, tastes, labour, and population, place the people in a precarious
and dangerous position, without any solid basis."

These are some of the reasons alleged by the adversaries of State
intervention in what concerns the order in which citizens think their
wants and desires should be satisfied, and to which, consequently, their
activity should be directed. I am, I confess, one of those who think
that choice and impulse ought to come from below and not from above,
from the citizen and not from the legislator; and the opposite doctrine
appears to me to tend to the destruction of liberty and of human
dignity.

But, by a deduction as false as it is unjust, do you know what
economists are accused of? It is, that when we disapprove of government
support, we are supposed to disapprove of the thing itself whose support
is discussed; and to be the enemies of every kind of activity, because
we desire to see those activities, on the one hand free, and on the
other seeking their own reward in themselves. Thus, if we think that the
State should not interfere by taxation in religious affairs, we are
atheists. If we think the State ought not to interfere by taxation in
education, we are hostile to knowledge. If we say that the State ought
not by taxation to give a fictitious value to land, or to any particular
branch of industry, we are enemies to property and labour. If we think
that the State ought not to support artists, we are barbarians, who look
upon the arts as useless.

Against such conclusions as these I protest with all my strength. Far
from entertaining the absurd idea of doing away with religion,
education, property, labour, and the arts, when we say that the State
ought to protect the free development of all these kinds of human
activity, without helping some of them at the expense of others--we
think, on the contrary, that all these living powers of society would
develop themselves more harmoniously under the influence of liberty; and
that, under such an influence no one of them would, as is now the case,
be a source of trouble, of abuses, of tyranny, and disorder.

Our adversaries consider that an activity which is neither aided by
supplies, nor regulated by government, is an activity destroyed. We
think just the contrary. Their faith is in the legislator, not in
mankind; ours is in mankind, not in the legislator.

Thus M. Lamartine said, "Upon this principle we must abolish the public
exhibitions, which are the honour and the wealth of this country." But I
would say to M. Lamartine,--According to your way of thinking, not to
support is to abolish; because, setting out upon the maxim that nothing
exists independently of the will of the State, you conclude that nothing
lives but what the State causes to live. But I oppose to this assertion
the very example which you have chosen, and beg you to remark, that the
grandest and noblest of exhibitions, one which has been conceived in the
most liberal and universal spirit--and I might even make use of the term
humanitary, for it is no exaggeration--is the exhibition now preparing
in London; the only one in which no government is taking any part, and
which is being paid for by no tax.

To return to the fine arts. There are, I repeat, many strong reasons to
be brought, both for and against the system of government assistance.
The reader must see that the especial, object of this work leads me
neither to explain these reasons, nor to decide in their favour, nor
against them.

But M. Lamartine has advanced one argument which I cannot pass by in
silence, for it is closely connected with this economic study. "The
economical question, as regards theatres, is comprised in one
word--labour. It matters little what is the nature of this labour; it is
as fertile, as productive a labour as any other kind of labour in the
nation. The theatres in France, you know, feed and salary no less than
80,000 workmen of different kinds; painters, masons, decorators,
costumers, architects, &c., which constitute the very life and movement
of several parts of this capital, and on this account they ought to have
your sympathies." Your sympathies! say rather your money.

And further on he says: "The pleasures of Paris are the labour and the
consumption of the provinces, and the luxuries of the rich are the wages
and bread of 200,000 workmen of every description, who live by the
manifold industry of the theatres on the surface of the republic, and
who receive from these noble pleasures, which render France illustrious,
the sustenance of their lives and the necessaries of their families and
children. It is to them that you will give 60,000 francs." (Very well;
very well. Great applause.) For my part I am constrained to say, "Very
bad! very bad!" confining this opinion, of course, within the bounds of
the economical question which we are discussing.

Yes, it is to the workmen of the theatres that a part, at least, of
these 60,000 francs will go; a few bribes, perhaps, may be abstracted on
the way. Perhaps, if we were to look a little more closely into the
matter, we might find that the cake had gone another way, and that those
workmen were fortunate who had come in for a few crumbs. But I will
allow, for the sake of argument, that the entire sum does go to the
painters, decorators, &c.

_This is that which is seen._ But whence does it come? This is the other
side of the question, and quite as important as the former. Where do
these 60,000 francs spring from? and where would they go, if a vote of
the legislature did not direct them first towards the Rue Rivoli and
thence towards the Rue Grenelle? This _is what is not seen_. Certainly,
nobody will think of maintaining that the legislative vote has caused
this sum to be hatched in a ballot urn; that it is a pure addition made
to the national wealth; that but for this miraculous vote these 60,000
francs would have been for ever invisible and impalpable. It must be
admitted that all that the majority can do is to decide that they shall
be taken from one place to be sent to another; and if they take one
direction, it is only because they have been diverted from another.

This being the case, it is clear that the tax-payer, who has contributed
one franc, will no longer have this franc at his own disposal. It is
clear that he will be deprived of some gratification to the amount of
one franc; and that the workman, whoever he may be, who would have
received it from him, will be deprived of a benefit to that amount. Let
us not, therefore, be led by a childish illusion into believing that the
vote of the 60,000 francs may add anything whatever to the well-being
of the country, and to national labour. It displaces enjoyments, it
transposes wages--that is all.

Will it be said that for one kind of gratification, and one kind of
labour, it substitutes more urgent, more moral, more reasonable
gratifications and labour? I might dispute this; I might say, by taking
60,000 francs from the tax-payers, you diminish the wages of labourers,
drainers, carpenters, blacksmiths, and increase in proportion those of
the singers.

There is nothing to prove that this latter class calls for more sympathy
than the former. M. Lamartine does not say that it is so. He himself
says that the labour of the theatres is _as_ fertile, _as_ productive as
any other (not more so); and this may be doubted; for the best proof
that the latter is not so fertile as the former lies in this, that the
other is to be called upon to assist it.

But this comparison between the value and the intrinsic merit of
different kinds of labour forms no part of my present subject. All I
have to do here is to show, that if M. Lamartine and those persons who
commend his line of argument have seen on one side the salaries gained
by the _providers_ of the comedians, they ought on the other to have
seen the salaries lost by the _providers_ of the taxpayers: for want of
this, they have exposed themselves to ridicule by mistaking a
_displacement_ for a _gain_. If they were true to their doctrine, there
would be no limits to their demands for government aid; for that which
is true of one franc and of 60,000 is true, under parallel
circumstances, of a hundred millions of francs.

When taxes are the subject of discussion, you ought to prove their
utility by reasons from the root of the matter, but not by this unlucky
assertion--"The public expenses support the working classes." This
assertion disguises the important fact, that _public expenses always_
supersede _private expenses_, and that therefore we bring a livelihood
to one workman instead of another, but add nothing to the share of the
working class as a whole. Your arguments are fashionable enough, but
they are too absurd to be justified by anything like reason.



V.--Public Works.


Nothing is more natural than that a nation, after having assured itself
that an enterprise will benefit the community, should have it executed
by means of a general assessment. But I lose patience, I confess, when I
hear this economic blunder advanced in support of such a
project--"Besides, it will be a means of creating labour for the
workmen."

The State opens a road, builds a palace, straightens a street, cuts a
canal, and so gives work to certain workmen--_this is what is seen_: but
it deprives certain other workmen of work--and this is what _is not
seen_.

The road is begun. A thousand workmen come every morning, leave every
evening, and take their wages--this is certain. If the road had not been
decreed, if the supplies had not been voted, these good people would
have had neither work nor salary there; this also is certain.

But is this all? Does not the operation, as a whole, contain something
else? At the moment when M. Dupin pronounces the emphatic words, "The
Assembly has adopted," do the millions descend miraculously on a
moonbeam into the coffers of MM. Fould and Bineau? In order that the
evolution may be complete, as it is said, must not the State organise
the receipts as well as the expenditure? must it not set its
tax-gatherers and tax-payers to work, the former to gather and the
latter to pay?

Study the question, now, in both its elements. While you state the
destination given by the State to the millions voted, do not neglect to
state also the destination which the tax-payer would have given, but
cannot now give, to the same. Then you will understand that a public
enterprise is a coin with two sides. Upon one is engraved a labourer at
work, with this device, _that which is seen_; on the other is a labourer
out of work, with the device, _that which is not seen_.

The sophism which this work is intended to refute is the more dangerous
when applied to public works, inasmuch as it serves to justify the most
wanton enterprises and extravagance. When a railroad or a bridge are of
real utility, it is sufficient to mention this utility. But if it does
not exist, what do they do? Recourse is had to this mystification: "We
must find work for the workmen."

Accordingly, orders are given that the drains in the Champ-de-Mars be
made and unmade. The great Napoleon, it is said, thought he was doing a
very philanthropic work by causing ditches to be made and then filled
up. He said, therefore, "What signifies the result? All we want is to
see wealth spread among the labouring classes."

But let us go to the root of the matter. We are deceived by money. To
demand the co-operation of all the citizens in a common work, in the
form of money, is in reality to demand a concurrence in kind; for every
one procures, by his own labour, the sum to which he is taxed. Now, if
all the citizens were to be called together, and made to execute, in
conjunction, a work useful to all, this would be easily understood;
their reward would be found in the results of the work itself.

But after having called them together, if you force them to make roads
which no one will pass through, palaces which no one will inhabit, and
this under the pretext of finding them work, it would be absurd, and
they would have a right to argue, "With this labour we have nothing to
do; we prefer working on our own account."

A proceeding which consists in making the citizens co-operate in giving
money but not labour, does not, in any way, alter the general results.
The only thing is, that the loss would react upon all parties. By the
former, those whom the State employs, escape their part of the loss, by
adding it to that which their fellow-citizens have already suffered.

There is an article in our constitution which says:--"Society favours
and encourages the development of labour--by the establishment of public
works, by the State, the departments, and the parishes, as a means of
employing persons who are in want of work."

As a temporary measure, on any emergency, during a hard winter, this
interference with the tax-payers may have its use. It acts in the same
way as securities. It adds nothing either to labour or to wages, but it
takes labour and wages from ordinary times to give them, at a loss it is
true, to times of difficulty.

As a permanent, general, systematic measure, it is nothing else than a
ruinous mystification, an impossibility, which shows a little excited
labour _which is seen_, and hides a great deal of prevented labour
_which is not seen_.



VI.--The Intermediates.


Society is the total of the forced or voluntary services which men
perform for each other; that is to say, of _public services_ and
_private services_.

The former, imposed and regulated by the law, which it is not always
easy to change, even when it is desirable, may survive with it their own
usefulness, and still preserve the name of _public services_, even when
they are no longer services at all, but rather _public annoyances_. The
latter belong to the sphere of the will, of individual responsibility.
Every one gives and receives what he wishes, and what he can, after a
debate. They have always the presumption of real utility, in exact
proportion to their comparative value.

This is the reason why the former description of services so often
become stationary, while the latter obey the law of progress.

While the exaggerated development of public services, by the waste of
strength which it involves, fastens upon society a fatal sycophancy, it
is a singular thing that several modern sects, attributing this
character to free and private services, are endeavouring to transform
professions into functions.

These sects violently oppose what they call intermediates. They would
gladly suppress the capitalist, the banker, the speculator, the
projector, the merchant, and the trader, accusing them of interposing
between production and consumption, to extort from both, without giving
either anything in return. Or rather, they would transfer to the State
the work which they accomplish, for this work cannot be suppressed.

The sophism of the Socialists on this point is, showing to the public
what it pays to the intermediates in exchange for their services, and
concealing from it what is necessary to be paid to the State. Here is
the usual conflict between what is before our eyes and what is
perceptible to the mind only; between _what is seen_ and _what is not
seen_.

It was at the time of the scarcity, in 1847, that the Socialist schools
attempted and succeeded in popularizing their fatal theory. They knew
very well that the most absurd notions have always a chance with people
who are suffering; _malisunda fames_.

Therefore, by the help of the fine words, "trafficking in men by men,
speculation on hunger, monopoly," they began to blacken commerce, and to
cast a veil over its benefits.

"What can be the use," they say, "of leaving to the merchants the care
of importing food from the United States and the Crimea? Why do not the
State, the departments, and the towns, organize a service for provisions
and a magazine for stores? They would sell at a _return price_, and the
people, poor things, would be exempted from the tribute which they pay
to free, that is, to egotistical, individual, and anarchical commerce."

The tribute paid by the people to commerce is _that which is seen_. The
tribute which the people would pay to the State, or to its agents, in
the Socialist system, is _what is not seen_.

In what does this pretended tribute, which the people pay to commerce,
consist? In this: that two men render each other a mutual service, in
all freedom, and under the pressure of competition and reduced prices.

When the hungry stomach is at Paris, and corn which can satisfy it is at
Odessa, the suffering cannot cease till the corn is brought into
contact with the stomach. There are three means by which this contact
may be effected. 1st. The famished men may go themselves and fetch the
corn. 2nd. They may leave this task to those to whose trade it belongs.
3rd. They may club together, and give the office in charge to public
functionaries. Which of these three methods possesses the greatest
advantages? In every time, in all countries, and the more free,
enlightened, and experienced they are, men have _voluntarily_ chosen the
second. I confess that this is sufficient, in my opinion, to justify
this choice. I cannot believe that mankind, as a whole, is deceiving
itself upon a point which touches it so nearly. But let us now consider
the subject.

For thirty-six millions of citizens to go and fetch the corn they want
from Odessa, is a manifest impossibility. The first means, then, goes
for nothing. The consumers cannot act for themselves. They must, of
necessity, have recourse to _intermediates_, officials or agents.

But observe, that the first of these three means would be the most
natural. In reality, the hungry man has to fetch his corn. It is a task
which concerns himself, a service due to himself. If another person, on
whatever ground, performs this service for him, takes the task upon
himself, this latter has a claim upon him for a compensation. I mean by
this to say that intermediates contain in themselves the principle of
remuneration.

However that may be, since we must refer to what the Socialists call a
parasite, I would ask, which of the two is the most exacting parasite
the merchant or the official?

Commerce (free, of course, otherwise I could not reason upon it),
commerce, I say, is led by its own interests to study the seasons, to
give daily statements of the state of the crops, to receive information
from every part of the globe, to foresee wants, to take precautions
beforehand. It has vessels always ready, correspondents everywhere; and
it is its immediate interest to buy at the lowest possible price, to
economize in all the details of its operations, and to attain the
greatest results by the smallest efforts. It is not the French merchants
only who are occupied in procuring provisions for France in time of
need, and if their interest leads them irresistibly to accomplish their
task at the smallest possible cost, the competition which they create
amongst each other leads them no less irresistibly to cause the
consumers to partake of the profits of those realised savings. The corn
arrives: it is to the interest of commerce to sell it as soon as
possible, so as to avoid risks, to realise its funds, and begin again
the first opportunity.

Directed by the comparison of prices, it distributes food over the whole
surface of the country, beginning always at the highest, price, that is,
where the demand is the greatest. It is impossible to imagine an
organisation more completely calculated to meet the interest of those
who are in want; and the beauty of this organisation, unperceived as it
is by the Socialists, results from the very fact that it is free. It is
true, the consumer is obliged to reimburse commerce for the expenses of
conveyance, freight, store-room, commission, &c.; but can any system be
devised in which he who eats corn is not obliged to defray the expenses,
whatever they may be, of bringing it within his reach? The remuneration
for the service performed has to be paid also; but as regards its
amount, this is reduced to the smallest possible sum by competition; and
as regards its justice, it would be very strange if the artizans of
Paris would not work for the artizans of Marseilles, when the merchants
of Marseilles work for the artizans of Paris.

If, according to the Socialist invention, the State were to stand in the
stead of commerce, what would happen? I should like to be informed where
the saving would be to the public? Would it be in the price of purchase?
Imagine the delegates of 40,000 parishes arriving at Odessa on a given
day, and on the day of need: imagine the effect upon prices. Would the
saving be in the expenses? Would fewer vessels be required; fewer
sailors, fewer transports, fewer sloops? or would you be exempt from the
payment of all these things? Would it be in the profits of the
merchants? Would your officials go to Odessa for nothing? Would they
travel and work on the principle of fraternity? Must they not live? Must
not they be paid for their time? And do you believe that these expenses
would not exceed a thousand times the two or three per cent. which the
merchant gains, at the rate at which he is ready to treat?

And then consider the difficulty of levying so many taxes, and of
dividing so much food. Think of the injustice, of the abuses inseparable
from such an enterprise. Think of the responsibility which would weigh
upon the Government.

The Socialists who have invented these follies, and who, in the days of
distress, have introduced them into the minds of the masses, take to
themselves literally the title of _advanced men_; and it is not without
some danger that custom, that tyrant of tongues, authorizes the term,
and the sentiment which it involves. _Advanced!_ This supposes that
these gentlemen can see further than the common people; that their only
fault is that they are too much in advance of their age; and if the time
is not yet come for suppressing certain free services, pretended
parasites, the fault is to be attributed to the public which is in the
rear of Socialism. I say, from my soul and my conscience, the reverse is
the truth; and I know not to what barbarous age we should have to go
back, if we would find the level of Socialist knowledge on this subject.
These modern sectarians incessantly oppose association to actual
society. They overlook the fact that society, under a free regulation,
is a true association, far superior to any of those which proceed from
their fertile imaginations.

Let me illustrate this by an example. Before a mutual services, and to
helping each other in a common object, and that all may be considered,
with respect to others, _intermediates_. If, for instance, in the course
of the operation, the conveyance becomes important enough to occupy one
person, the spinning another, the weaving another, why should the first
be considered a _parasite_ more than the other two? The conveyance must
be made, must it not? Does not he who performs it devote to it his time
and trouble? and by so doing does he not spare that of his colleagues?
Do these do more or other than this for him? Are they not equally
dependent for remuneration, that is, for the division of the produce,
upon the law of reduced price? Is it not in all liberty, for the common
good, that this separation of work takes place, and that these
arrangements are entered into? What do we want with a Socialist then,
who, under pretence of organising for us, comes despotically to break up
our voluntary arrangements, to check the division of labour, to
substitute isolated efforts for combined ones, and to send civilisation
back? Is association, as I describe it here, in itself less association,
because every one enters and leaves it freely, chooses his place in it,
judges and bargains for himself on his own responsibility, and brings
with him the spring and warrant of personal interest? That it may
deserve this name, is it necessary that a pretended reformer should come
and impose upon us his plan and his will, and, as it were, to
concentrate mankind in himself?

The more we examine these _advanced schools_, the more do we become
convinced that there is but one thing at the root of them: ignorance
proclaiming itself infallible, and claiming despotism in the name of
this infallibility.

I hope the reader will excuse this digression. It may not be altogether
useless, at a time when declamations, springing from St. Simonian,
Phalansterian, and Icarian books, are invoking the press and the
tribune, and which seriously threaten the liberty of labour and
commercial transactions.



VII.--Restrictions.


M. Prohibant (it was not I who gave him this name, but M. Charles Dupin)
devoted his time and capital to converting the ore found on his land
into iron. As nature had been more lavish towards the Belgians, they
furnished the French with iron cheaper than M. Prohibant; which means,
that all the French, or France, could obtain a given quantity of iron
with less labour by buying it of the honest Flemings. Therefore, guided
by their own interest, they did not fail to do so; and every day there
might be seen a multitude of nail-smiths, blacksmiths, cartwrights,
machinists, farriers, and labourers, going themselves, or sending
intermediates, to supply themselves in Belgium. This displeased M.
Prohibant exceedingly.

At first, it occurred to him to put an end to this abuse by his own
efforts: it was the least he could do, for he was the only sufferer. "I
will take my carbine," said he; "I will put four pistols into my belt; I
will fill my cartridge box; I will gird on my sword, and go thus
equipped to the frontier. There, the first blacksmith, nail-smith,
farrier, machinist, or locksmith, who presents himself to do his own
business and not mine, I will kill, to teach him how to live." At the
moment of starting, M. Prohibant made a few reflections which calmed
down his warlike ardour a little. He said to himself, "In the first
place, it is not absolutely impossible that the purchasers of iron, my
countrymen and enemies, should take the thing ill, and, instead of
letting me kill them, should kill me instead; and then, even were I to
call out all my servants, we should not be able to defend the passages.
In short, this proceeding would cost me very dear, much more so than the
result would be worth."

M. Prohibant was on the point of resigning himself to his sad fate, that
of being only as free as the rest of the world, when a ray of light
darted across his brain. He recollected that at Paris there is a great
manufactory of laws. "What is a law?" said he to himself. "It is a
measure to which, when once it is decreed, be it good or bad, everybody
is bound to conform. For the execution of the same a public force is
organised, and to constitute the said public force, men and money are
drawn from the whole nation. If, then, I could only get the great
Parisian manufactory to pass a little law, 'Belgian iron is
prohibited,' I should obtain the following results:--The Government
would replace the few valets that I was going to send to the frontier by
20,000 of the sons of those refractory blacksmiths, farriers, artizans,
machinists, locksmiths, nail-smiths, and labourers. Then to keep these
20,000 custom-house officers in health and good humour, it would
distribute among them 25,000,000 of francs taken from these blacksmiths,
nail-smiths, artizans, and labourers. They would guard the frontier much
better; would cost me nothing; I should not be exposed to the brutality
of the brokers; should sell the iron at my own price, and have the sweet
satisfaction of seeing our great people shamefully mystified. That would
teach them to proclaim themselves perpetually the harbingers and
promoters of progress in Europe. Oh! it would be a capital joke, and
deserves to be tried."

So M. Prohibant went to the law manufactory. Another time, perhaps, I
shall relate the story of his underhand dealings, but now I shall merely
mention his visible proceedings. He brought the following consideration
before the view of the legislating gentlemen.

"Belgian iron is sold in France at ten francs, which obliges me to sell
mine at the same price. I should like to sell at fifteen, but cannot do
so on account of this Belgian iron, which I wish was at the bottom of
the Red Sea. I beg you will make a law that no more Belgian iron shall
enter France. Immediately I raise my price five francs, and these are
the consequences:--

"For every hundred-weight of iron that I shall deliver to the public, I
shall receive fifteen francs instead of ten; I shall grow rich more
rapidly, extend my traffic, and employ more workmen. My workmen and I
shall spend much more freely, to the great advantage of our tradesmen
for miles around. These latter, having more custom, will furnish more
employment to trade, and activity on both sides will increase in the
country. This fortunate piece of money, which you will drop into my
strong-box, will, like a stone thrown into a lake, give birth to an
infinite number of concentric circles."

Charmed with his discourse, delighted to learn that it is so easy to
promote, by legislating, the prosperity of a people, the law-makers
voted the restriction. "Talk of labour and economy," they said, "what is
the use of these painful means of increasing the national wealth, when
all that is wanted for this object is a decree?"

And, in fact, the law produced all the consequences announced by M.
Prohibant: the only thing was, it produced others which he had not
foreseen. To do him justice, his reasoning was not false, but only
incomplete. In endeavouring to obtain a privilege, he had taken
cognizance of the effects _which are seen_, leaving in the background
those _which are not seen_. He had pointed out only two personages,
whereas there are three concerned in the affair. It is for us to supply
this involuntary or premeditated omission.

It is true, the crown-piece, thus directed by law into M. Prohibant's
strong-box, is advantageous to him and to those whose labour it would
encourage; and if the Act had caused the crown-piece to descend from the
moon, these good effects would not have been counterbalanced by any
corresponding evils. Unfortunately, the mysterious piece of money does
not come from the moon, but from the pocket of a blacksmith, or a
nail-smith, or a cartwright, or a farrier, or a labourer, or a
shipwright; in a word, from James B., who gives it now without receiving
a grain more of iron than when he was paying ten francs. Thus, we can
see at a glance that this very much alters the state of the case; for it
is very evident that M. Prohibant's _profit_ is compensated by James
B.'s _loss_, and all that M. Prohibant can do with the crown-piece, for
the encouragement of national labour, James B. might have done himself.
The stone has only been thrown upon one part of the lake, because the
law has prevented it from being thrown upon another.

Therefore, _that which is not seen_ supersedes _that which is seen_, and
at this point there remains, as the residue of the operation, a piece of
injustice, and, sad to say, a piece of injustice perpetrated by the law!

This is not all. I have said that there is always a third person left
in the background. I must now bring him forward, that he may reveal to
us a _second loss_ of five francs. Then we shall have the entire results
of the transaction.

James B. is the possessor of fifteen francs, the fruit of his labour. He
is now free. What does he do with his fifteen francs? He purchases some
article of fashion for ten francs, and with it he pays (or the
intermediate pay for him) for the hundred-weight of Belgian iron. After
this he has five francs left. He does not throw them into the river, but
(and this is _what is not seen_) he gives them to some tradesman in
exchange for some enjoyment; to a bookseller, for instance, for
Bossuet's "Discourse on Universal History."

Thus, as far as national labour is concerned, it is encouraged to the
amount of fifteen francs, viz.:--ten francs for the Paris article, five
francs to the bookselling trade.

As to James B., he obtains for his fifteen francs two gratifications,
viz.:--

1st. A hundred-weight of iron.

2nd. A book.

The decree is put in force. How does it affect the condition of James
B.? How does it affect the national labour?

James B. pays every centime of his five francs to M. Prohibant, and
therefore is deprived of the pleasure of a book, or of some other thing
of equal value. He loses five francs. This must be admitted; it cannot
fail to be admitted, that when the restriction raises the price of
things, the consumer loses the difference.

But, then, it is said, _national labour_ is the gainer.

No, it is not the gainer; for since the Act, it is no more encouraged
than it was before, to the amount of fifteen francs.

The only thing is that, since the Act, the fifteen francs of James B. go
to the metal trade, while before it was put in force, they were divided
between the milliner and the bookseller.

The violence used by M. Prohibant on the frontier, or that which he
causes to be used by the law, may be judged very differently in a moral
point of view. Some persons consider that plunder is perfectly
justifiable, if only sanctioned by law. But, for myself, I cannot
imagine anything more aggravating. However it may be, the economical
results are the same in both cases.

Look at the thing as you will; but if you are impartial, you will see
that no good can come of legal or illegal plunder. We do not deny that
it affords M. Prohibant, or his trade, or, if you will, national
industry, a profit of five francs. But we affirm that it causes two
losses, one to James B., who pays fifteen francs where he otherwise
would have paid ten; the other to national industry, which does not
receive the difference. Take your choice of these two losses, and
compensate with it the profit which we allow. The other will prove not
the less a _dead loss_. Here is the moral: To take by violence is not to
produce, but to destroy. Truly, if taking by violence was producing,
this country of ours would be a little richer than she is.



VIII.--Machinery.


"A curse on machines! Every year, their increasing power devotes
millions of workmen to pauperism, by depriving them of work, and
therefore of wages and bread. A curse on machines!"

This is the cry which is raised by vulgar prejudice, and echoed in the
journals.

But to curse machines is to curse the spirit of humanity!

It puzzles me to conceive how any man can feel any satisfaction in such
a doctrine.

For, if true, what is its inevitable consequence? That there is no
activity, prosperity, wealth, or happiness possible for any people,
except for those who are stupid and inert, and to whom God has not
granted the fatal gift of knowing how to think, to observe, to combine,
to invent, and to obtain the greatest results with the smallest means.
On the contrary, rags, mean huts, poverty, and inanition, are the
inevitable lot of every nation which seeks and finds in iron, fire,
wind, electricity, magnetism, the laws of chemistry and mechanics, in a
word, in the powers of nature, an assistance to its natural powers. We
might as well say with Rousseau--"Every man that thinks is a depraved
animal."

This is not all. If this doctrine is true, since all men think and
invent, since all, from first to last, and at every moment of their
existence, seek the co-operation of the powers of nature, and try to
make the most of a little, by reducing either the work of their hands or
their expenses, so as to obtain the greatest possible amount of
gratification with the smallest possible amount of labour, it must
follow, as a matter of course, that the whole of mankind is rushing
