distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Outward Bound, by Oliver Optic

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Outward Bound
       Or, Young America Afloat

Author: Oliver Optic

Release Date: May 27, 2005 [EBook #15920]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OUTWARD BOUND ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Norma Elliott and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team. (www.pgdp.net)









[Illustration: YOUNG AMERICA ABROAD

By
OLIVER OPTIC


OUTWARD BOUND



BOSTON
LEE & SHEPARD.]

        *       *       *       *       *

OUTWARD BOUND;

OR,

YOUNG AMERICA AFLOAT.

A STORY OF TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE.

BY

WILLIAM T. ADAMS

(_OLIVER OPTIC_).

BOSTON:
LEE AND SHEPARD.

1869.


        *       *       *       *       *


Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1866, by
WILLIAM T. ADAMS,
In the Clerk's Office of the District Court
of the District of Massachusetts.


        *       *       *       *       *


TO GEORGE WEBSTER TERRILL

_This Volume_

IS RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED.


        *       *       *       *       *


YOUNG AMERICA ABROAD.

BY OLIVER OPTIC.


A Library of Travel and Adventure in Foreign Lands. First and Second
Series; six volumes in each Series. 16mo. Illustrated.


_First Series_.

I.  _OUTWARD BOUND,_ OR, YOUNG AMERICA AFLOAT.

II. _SHAMROCK AND THISTLE_; OR, YOUNG AMERICA IN IRELAND AND SCOTLAND.

III _RED CROSS_; OR, YOUNG AMERICA IN ENGLAND AND WALES.

IV. _DIKES AND DITCHES_; OR, YOUNG AMERICA IN HOLLAND AND BELGIUM.

V. _PALACE AND COTTAGE_; OR, YOUNG AMERICA IN FRANCE AND SWITZERLAND.

VI. _DOWN THE RHINE_; OR, YOUNG AMERICA IN GERMANY.


_Second Series_.

I. _UP THE BALTIC_; OR, YOUNG AMERICA IN DENMARK AND SWEDEN.

II. _NORTHERN LANDS_; OR, YOUNG AMERICA IN PRUSSIA AND RUSSIA.

III. _VINE AND OLIVE_; OR, YOUNG AMERICA IN SPAIN AND PORTUGAL.

IV. _SUNNY SHORES_; OR, YOUNG AMERICA IN ITALY AND AUSTRIA.

V. _CROSS AND CRESCENT_; OR, YOUNG AMERICA IN GREECE AND TURKEY.

VI. _ISLES OF THE SEA_; OR, YOUNG AMERICA HOMEWARD BOUND.


        *       *       *       *       *



PREFACE.


Outward Bound is the first volume of "A Library of Travel and Adventure
in Foreign Lands," and contains the voyage of the Academy Ship "Young
America" across the Atlantic. The origin and progress of this aquatic
institution are incidentally developed, and the plan is respectfully
submitted to the consideration of those who are interested in the
education and moral training of the class of young men who are the
characters in the scenes described in this work. Besides a full
description of the routine and discipline of the ship, as an educational
and reformatory institution, the volume contains a rather free _exposé_
of the follies and frailties of youth, but their vices are revealed to
suggest the remedy.

The story includes the experience of the officers and crew of the Young
America, eighty-seven in number, though, of course, only a few of them
can appear as prominent actors. As the ship has a little world, with all
the elements of good and evil, within her wooden walls, the story of the
individual will necessarily be interwoven with that of the mass; and the
history of "The Chain League," in the present volume, of which Shuffles
is the hero, will, it is hoped, convey an instructive lesson to young
men who are disposed to rebel against reasonable discipline and
authority. In the succeeding volumes of this series, the adventures,
travels, and "sight-seeing," as well as the individual and collective
experience of the juvenile crew of the Academy Ship, will be narrated.
They will visit the principal ports of Europe, as well as penetrate to
the interior; but they will always be American boys, wherever they are.

The author hopes that the volumes of the series will not only be
instructive as a description of foreign lands, and interesting as a
record of juvenile exploits, but that they will convey correct views of
moral and social duties, and stimulate the young reader to their
faithful performance.

HARRISON SQUARE, MASS.,
November 2, 1866.


        *       *       *       *       *



CONTENTS.


CHAPTER                        PAGE

I. THE IDEA SUGGESTED             11

II. THE YOUNG AMERICA             27

III. THE ENSIGN AT THE PEAK.      43

IV. OFFICERS AND SEAMEN.          59

V. OUR FELLOWS.                   75

VI. THE FOURTH OF JULY.           91

VII. HEAVING THE LOG.            106

VIII. OUTWARD BOUND.             122

IX. THE WATCH BILL.              138

X. MAKING A CHAIN.               154

XI. THE GAMBLERS IN NO. 8.       170

XII. THE ROOT OF ALL EVIL.       186

XIII. PIPING TO MISCHIEF.        202

XIV. ALL HANDS, REEF TOPSAILS!   218

XV. AFTER THE GALE.              233

XVI. THE WRECK OF THE SYLVIA     248

XVII. PEAS AND BEANS             263

XVIII. THE RESULT OF THE BALLOT  280

XIX. MAN OVERBOARD!              299

XX. THE END OF THE CHAIN LEAGUE  318


        *       *       *       *       *


OUTWARD BOUND.




OUTWARD BOUND;

OR,

YOUNG AMERICA AFLOAT


        *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER I.

THE IDEA SUGGESTED.


"There are no such peaches this side of New Jersey; and you can't get
them, for love or money, at the stores. All we have to do is, to fill
our pockets, and keep our mouths closed--till the peaches are ripe
enough to eat," said Robert Shuffles, the older and the larger of two
boys, who had just climbed over the high fence that surrounded the fine
garden of Mr. Lowington.

"What will Baird say if he finds it out?" replied Isaac Monroe, his
companion.

"Baird," the gentleman thus irreverently alluded to, was the principal
of the Brockway Academy, of which Shuffles and Monroe were pupils in the
boarding department.

"What will he say when he finds out that the King of the Tonga Islands
picks his teeth with a pitchfork?" added Shuffles, contemptuously. "I
don't intend that he shall find it out? and he won't, unless you tell
him."

"Of course, I shall not tell him."

"Come along, then? it is nearly dark, and no one will see us."

Shuffles led the way down the gravelled walk, till he came to a brook,
on the bank of which stood the peach tree whose rich fruit had tempted
the young gentlemen to invade the territory of Mr. Lowington with intent
to plunder.

"There they are," said the chief of the young marauders, as he paused
behind a clump of quince bushes, and pointed at the coveted fruit.
"There's no discount on them, and they are worth coming after."

"Hark!" whispered Monroe. "I heard a noise."

"What was it?"

"I don't know. I'm afraid we shall be caught."

"No danger; no one can see us from the house."

"But I'm sure there's some one near. I heard something."

"Nonsense! It was only a dagger of the mind, such as Baird talks about,"
answered Shuffles, as he crawled towards the peach tree. "Come, Monroe,
be quick, and fill your pockets."

This peach tree was a choice variety, in whose cultivation the owner had
been making an elaborate experiment. Mr. Lowington had watched it and
nursed it with the most assiduous care, and now it bore about a dozen
remarkably large and beautiful peaches. They were not quite ripe enough
to be gathered, but Shuffles was confident that they would "mellow" in
his trunk as well as on the tree. The experiment of the cultivator had
been a success, and he had already prepared, with much care and labor, a
paper explanatory of the process, which he intended to read before the
Pomological Society, exhibiting the fruit as the evidence of the
practicability of his method. To Mr. Lowington, therefore, the peaches
had a value far beyond their intrinsic worth.

Shuffles gathered a couple of the peaches, and urged his companion to
use all possible haste in stripping the tree of its rich burden.

"Hallo, there! What are you about?" shouted some one, who hastened to
make his presence known to the plunderers.

Monroe began to retreat.

"Hold on!" interposed Shuffles. "It's no one but Harry Martyn."

"He can tell of us just as well as anybody else."

"If he does, he will catch it."

"What are you doing?" demanded Harry Martyn,--who was a nephew of Mr.
Lowington, and lived with him,--as he crossed the rustic bridge that
spanned the brook.

"Don't you see what I'm doing?" replied Shuffles, with an impudent
coolness which confounded Harry.

"Stop that, Shuffles!" cried Harry, indignantly. "My uncle wouldn't take
ten dollars apiece for those peaches."

"That's more than he'll get for them," added Shuffles, as he reached up
and gathered another peach.

"Stop that, I tell you!" said Harry, angrily, as he stepped up, in a
menacing attitude, before the reckless marauder.

"Shut up, Harry! You know me, and when I get all these peaches, I've got
something to say to you."

Shuffles was about to gather another of the peaches, when Harry, his
indignation overcoming his prudence, grasped his arm, and pulled him
away from the tree.

"What do you mean, Harry Martyn?" exclaimed Shuffles, apparently
astonished at the temerity of the youth. "I can't stop to lick you now;
but I'll do it within twenty-four hours."

"Well, don't you touch those peaches, then."

"Yes, I will touch them. I intend to have the whole of them; and if you
say a word to your uncle or any one else about it, I'll pulverize that
head of yours."

"No, you won't! You shall not have those peaches, anyhow," replied the
resolute little fellow, who was no match, physically, for Shuffles.

"If you open your mouth----"

"Hallo! Uncle Robert! Help, help! Thieves in the garden!" shouted Harry,
who certainly had no defect of the lungs.

"Take that, you little monkey!" said Shuffles, angrily, as he struck the
little fellow a heavy blow on the side of the head with his fist, which
knocked him down. "I'll fix you the next, time I see you."

Shuffles consulted his discretion rather than his valor, now that the
alarm had been given, and retreated towards the place where he had
entered garden.

"What's the matter, Harry?" asked Mr. Lowington, as he rushed over the
bridge, followed by the gardener and his assistants, just as Harry was
picking himself up and rubbing his head.

"They were stealing your peaches, and I tried to stop them," replied
Harry. "They have taken some of them now."

Mr. Lowington glanced at the favorite tree, and his brow lowered with
anger and vexation. His paper before the "Pomological" could be
illustrated by only nine peaches, instead of thirteen.

"Who stole them, Harry?" demanded the disappointed fruit-grower.

The nephew hesitated a moment, and the question was repeated with more
sternness.

"Robert Shuffles; Isaac Monroe was with him, but he didn't take any of
the peaches."

"What is the matter with your head, Harry?" asked his uncle, when he
observed him rubbing the place where the blow had fallen.

"Shuffles struck me and knocked me down, when I called out for you."

"Did he? Where is he now?"

"He and Monroe ran up the walk to the back of the garden."

"That boy shall be taken care of," continued Mr. Lowington, as he walked
up the path towards the point where the marauders had entered. "The
Academy is fast becoming a nuisance to the neighborhood, because there
is neither order nor discipline among the students."

The thieves had escaped, and as it would be useless to follow them, Mr.
Lowington went back to the house; but he was too much annoyed at the
loss of his splendid peaches, which were to figure so prominently before
the "Pomological," to permit the matter to drop without further notice.

"Did he hurt you much, Harry?" asked Mr. Lowington as they entered the
house.

"Not much, sir, though he gave me a pretty hard crack," answered Harry.

"Did you see them when they came into the garden?"

"No, sir? I was fixing my water-wheel in the brook, when I heard them at
the tree. I went up, and tried to prevent Shuffles from taking the
peaches. I caught hold of him, and pulled him away. He said he couldn't
stop to lick me then, but he'd do it within twenty-four hours. Then he
hit me when I called for help."

"The young scoundrel! That boy is worse than a pestilence in any
neighborhood. Mr. Baird seems to have no control over him."

Suddenly, and without any apparent reason, Mr. Lowington's compressed
lips and contracted brow relaxed, and his face wore its usual expression
of dignified serenity. Harry could not understand the cause of this
sudden change; but his uncle's anger had passed away. The fact was, that
Mr. Lowington happened to think, while his indignation prompted him to
resort to the severest punishment for Shuffles, that he himself had been
just such a boy as the plunderer of his cherished fruit. At the age of
fifteen he had been the pest of the town in which he resided. His father
was a very wealthy man, and resorted to many expedients to cure the boy
of his vicious propensities.

Young Lowington had a taste for the sea, and his father finally procured
a midshipman's warrant for him to enter the navy. The strict discipline
of a ship of war proved to be the "one thing needful" for the
reformation of the wild youth; and he not only became a steady young
man, but a hard student and an accomplished officer. The navy made a man
of him, as it has of hundreds of the sons of rich men, demoralized by
idleness and the absence of a reasonable ambition.

When Mr. Lowington was thirty years old, his father died, leaving to
each of his three children a quarter of a million; and he had resigned
his position in the navy, in order to take care of his property, and to
lead a more domestic life with his wife and daughter than the discipline
of the service would permit.

He had taken up his residence in Brockway, the early home of his wife.
It was a large town on the sea shore, only a few miles from the
metropolis of New England, thus combining all the advantages of a home
in the city and in the country. For several years he had been happy in
his peaceful retirement. But not wealth, nor even integrity and piety,
can bar the door of the lofty mansion against the Destroyer of the race.
His wife died of an hereditary disease, which gave no indication of its
presence till she had passed her thirtieth year. Two years later, his
daughter, just blooming into maturity, followed her mother down to the
silent tomb, stricken in her freshness and beauty by the same insidious
malady.

The husband and father was left desolate. His purest and fondest hopes
were blighted; but, while he was submissive to the will of the Father,
who doeth all things well, he became gloomy and sad. He was not seen to
smile for a year after the death of his daughter, and it was three years
before he had recovered even the outward semblance of his former
cheerfulness. He was rich, but alone in the world. He continued to
reside in the home which was endeared to him by the memories of his
loved and lost ones.

When his wife's sister died in poverty, leaving two children, he had
taken them to his home, and had become a father to them. Harry Martyn
was a good boy, and Josephine Martyn was a good girl; but they were not
his own children. There was something wanting--an aching void which they
could not fill, though Mr. Lowington was to them all that could be asked
or expected of a parent.

Mr. Lowington busied himself in various studies and experiments; but
life had ceased to be what it was before the death of his wife and
daughter. He wanted more mental occupation; he felt the need of greater
activity, and he was tempted to return to the navy, even after his
absence of ten years from the service; but this step, for many reasons,
was not practicable. At the time when his garden was invaded by the
vandal students from the Brockway Academy, he was still thinking what he
could do to save himself from the inglorious life of ease he was
leading, and, at the same time, serve his country and his race.

Shuffles had robbed his garden of some of his choicest fruit; had struck
his nephew a severe blow on the head, and threatened to inflict still
greater chastisement upon him in the future. Mr. Lowington was justly
indignant; and his own peace and the peace of the neighborhood demanded
that the author of the mischief should be punished, especially as he was
an old transgressor. It was absolutely necessary that something should
be done, and the retired naval officer was in the right frame of mind to
do it. Just then, when he was wrought up to the highest pitch of
indignation, his anger vanished. Shuffles at sixteen was the counterpart
of himself at fifteen.

This was certainly no reason why the hand of justice should be stayed.
Mr. Lowington did not intend to stay it, though the thought of his own
juvenile depravity modified his view, and appeased his wrath. He put on
his hat and left the house. He walked over to the Academy, and being
shown to the office of the principal, he informed him of the
depredations committed in his garden.

"Who did it, Mr. Lowington?" demanded the principal, with proper
indignation in his tones and his looks.

"Shuffles."

"I need not have asked. That boy gives me more trouble than all the
others put together," added Mr. Baird, with an anxious expression. "And
yet what can I do with him?"

"Expel him," replied Mr. Lowington, laconically.

"I don't like to do that."

"Why not?"

"It would be an injury to me."

"Why so?"

"It would offend his father, who is a person of wealth and influence.
When Shuffles came to Brockway ten other boys came with him. He was
expelled from another institution, which so incensed his father that he
induced the parents of ten others to take their sons out, and send them
to me. If I expel Shuffles, I shall lose about a dozen of my students,
and I can't afford to do that."

"But must the neighborhood suffer from his depredations?"

"I will talk with the boy; I will keep him in his room for a week."

"I'm afraid the boy needs severer measures. If this were the first, or
even the third time, I would, not say so much."

"My dear sir, what can I do?"

"The boy needs strict discipline. If I were still in the navy, and had
him aboard my ship, I could make a man of him."

"I don't think anything can be done."

"Something must be done, Mr. Baird. My garden shall not be robbed with
impunity."

"I will do what I can, Mr. Lowington."

But the owner of the stolen fruit was by this time satisfied that
nothing would be done. The principal of the Brockway Academy had not
force nor influence enough to control such a boy as Shuffles. Mr.
Lowington took his leave, determined to apply to another tribunal for
the correction of the evil. That night the peach thieves were arrested,
and put in the lock-up. The next day they were tried, found guilty, and
sentenced to pay a fine and costs, which Mr. Baird promptly paid. Within
a week Mr. Lowington's stable was burned to the ground. Shuffles was
seen near the building just before the fire broke out; but it could not
be proved that he was the incendiary, though no one doubted the fact. He
was arrested, but discharged on the examination.

"You see how it is, Mr. Lowington," said the principal of the Academy,
as the two gentlemen met after the examination. "It would have been
better for you if you had not prosecuted the boy for stealing the
peaches."

"I don't think so," replied Mr. Lowington. "I must do my duty, without
regard to consequences; and you will pardon me if I say you ought to do
the same."

"If I expel the boy he would burn the house over my head."

"Then you think he burned my stable?"

"I don't know; it cannot be proved that he did."

"I have no doubt of the fact. I have no ill will against the boy. I only
desire to protect myself and my neighbors from his depredations."

"I think you were very unfortunate in the method you adopted, Mr.
Lowington," replied the principal of the Academy. "It has reacted upon
yourself."

"Shall this boy steal my fruit and burn my buildings with impunity?"
added Mr. Lowington, with considerable warmth.

"Certainly not."

"I applied to you for redress, Mr. Baird."

"I told you I would talk with the boy."

"Such a reprobate as that needs something more than talk."

"What would you do with him, sir?" demanded Mr. Baird, earnestly.

"I hardly know. I should certainly have expelled him; but that, while it
protects the Academy, does not benefit the boy."

"It would only harden the boy."

"Very likely; and his remaining will harden a dozen more by his
influence. Mr. Baird, I shall be obliged to take my nephew out of your
institution," added Mr. Lowington, seriously.

"Take him out?"

"I must, indeed."

"Why so?" asked Mr. Baird, who was touched in a very tender place.

"Because I am not willing to keep him under the influence of such an
example as this Shuffles sets for his companions. As the matter now
stands, the young rascal has more influence in the Academy than you
have. You cannot manage him, and you dare not expel him. The boy knows
this, and he will not leave his advantage unused."

"I hope you won't take Harry out of the school," said Mr. Baird.

"I must."

"Others may do the same."

"I cannot help it; with my view of the matter, they can hardly do
otherwise."

"But you see, sir, what the effect of this step must be."

"Mr. Baird, I must be frank with you. You have declined to expel
Shuffles, while you know that his influence is bad. You asked me what
you should do? and I told you. Now, you prefer to retain Shuffles, but
you must lose others. Permit me to say that you should do your duty
without regard to consequences."

"I cannot afford to lose my scholars."

"Your position is a difficult one. I grant, Mr. Baird; but without
discipline you can do nothing for yourself or the boys."

Mr. Lowington went home, Harry was taken from the Academy, and a dozen
parents and guardians followed the example of the advocate for
discipline. Mr. Baird was in despair. The institution was falling to
pieces for the want of discipline. The principal had not the nerve to
enforce order, even with the limited means within his reach. He went to
see Mr. Lowington and begged him to assist in stemming the tide which
was setting against the Brockway Academy. The retired naval officer
became deeply interested in the subject of school discipline in general,
especially in its connection with the education of rich men's sons given
to insubordination. He pitied poor Mr. Baird in his perplexities, for he
was a good man and an excellent teacher.

In the mean time Shuffles grew worse instead of better. Finding that he
could have his own way, that the principal was no match for him, his
influence for evil was stronger than Mr. Baird's for good. The worthy
schoolmaster had finally resolved to expel his troublesome student,
when Mr. Lowington one day surprised him by offering to buy out the
Academy at a price far exceeding its value. He gladly accepted the offer
as the best solution of the problem, and the naval officer became
principal of the Brockway Academy.

Mr. Lowington did not expel the refractory pupil at once. He waited for
an overt act; but Shuffles found the anaconda of authority tightening
upon him. He attempted to vindicate himself before his fellow-students
by setting fire to a haystack on the marsh, belonging to the new
principal. A searching investigation followed, and Shuffles was
convicted. Mr. Lowington wrote to the boy's father, announcing his
expulsion. Mr. Shuffles went to Brockway full of wrath, and threatened
the new head of the institution with the loss of a large number of his
scholars if he disgraced his son by expelling him. If the boy had done
wrong,--and he supposed he had,--let him be talked to; let him be
confined to his room for a day or two; but he must not be expelled; it
was a disgrace to the boy.

The principal was as firm as a rock, and Mr. Shuffles was calm when he
found that threats were unavailing. Mr. Lowington pointed out to his
visitor the perils which lay in the path of his son. Mr. Shuffles began
to be reasonable, and dined with the principal. A long and earnest
consideration of the whole matter took place over the dessert. The fiat
of expulsion was revoked, and young Shuffles was turned over to the
ex-naval officer, with full power to discipline him as he thought best.
Mr. Lowington had converted the father, and he hoped he should be able
to convert the son.

After dinner, Mr. Shuffles went down the bay with his host in the yacht.
On the way they passed the school ship Massachusetts, to which boys are
sentenced by the courts for crime and vagrancy, and on board of which
they are disciplined and educated. Mr. Lowington explained the
institution to his guest.

"An excellent idea," said Mr. Shuffles.

"It is just the place for your son," replied Mr. Lowington.

"But it is for criminals."

"Very true."

"Robert is not a criminal."

"If he is not now, he soon will be, if he continues in his present
course. If I had him on shipboard, I could make a man of him."

"Then I wish you had him on shipboard."

"Perhaps I may yet," replied the principal, with a smile. "I did not
purchase the Academy with the intention of becoming a pedagogue, in the
ordinary sense of the word. I have no intention of remaining in it."

"I hope you will."

"I have been thinking of fitting up a vessel like the school ship, that
rich men's sons may have the benefit of such an institution without the
necessity of committing a crime. I could do more for the boys in a month
on board ship than I could in a year at Brockway."

This was the first mention which Mr. Lowington made of his plan, though
he had been considering it for several weeks. Mr. Shuffles hoped that
this idea of a nautical academy would be reduced to practice; for he now
felt that it was just what his son needed. The project was discussed
during the rest of the trip.

The history of the scheme, from its inception, need not be followed in
detail. Many persons were consulted in regard to it; there were plenty
to approve, and plenty to disapprove; but in October the keel of a four
hundred ton ship was laid down. The object of this marine institution
was thoroughly explained, and before the ship was ready for launching
there were applications for every berth on board of her.

The idea was exceedingly popular among the boys, all of whom were
anxious to be students on board, especially as it was already hinted
that the ship would visit Europe. To parents it held out for their sons
all the benefits of a sea voyage, with few of its disadvantages. It
would furnish healthy exercise and a vigorous constitution to its
pupils.

In March of the following year the ship was at anchor in Brockway
harbor, ready to receive her juvenile crew.




CHAPTER II.

THE YOUNG AMERICA.


With Mr. Lowington, the Academy Ship, which was the name he usually
applied to the idea he had matured, and thus far carried into effect,
was not a speculation; he did not intend to see how much money could be
made by the scheme. It was an experiment in the education of rich men's
sons, for only rich men could pay for scholarships in such an expensive
institution.

The Brockway Academy was to be continued, under the management of a
board of trustees. An accomplished teacher had been selected by Mr.
Lowington, and the school, under its present administration, was in a
highly prosperous condition. Only ten of its pupils had been transferred
to the Academy Ship, for it required no little nerve on the part of
parents to send their sons to school on the broad ocean, to battle with
the elements, to endure the storms of the Atlantic, and to undergo the
hardships which tender mothers supposed to be inseparably connected with
a life on shipboard.

For six months Mr. Lowington had studied upon his plan, and it was
hardly matured when the new ship came to anchor in Brockway harbor.
During this period he had visited the principal cities of the Northern
States, those of the southern section being closed against his
operations by the war of the rebellion then raging at the height of its
fury. He had interested his friends in his bold enterprise, and boys
with, whom the experiment was to be inaugurated were gathered from all
parts of the country.

The securing of the requisite number of pupils was the first success,
and what he had regarded as the most difficult part of the enterprise.
More than half of them had been obtained before it was deemed prudent to
lay the keel of the ship. The details of the plan had been carefully
considered during the winter, and when the ship was moored at Brockway,
the organization of the school, its rules and regulations had all been
written out. The boys began to arrive about the first of March, and by
the first of April all of them, eighty-seven in number, were on board.

Mr. Lowington was naturally very anxious for the success of his
experiment, and for months he had labored with unceasing diligence in
perfecting his plan, and carrying it into operation. In this occupation
he had found the activity he needed; and he may not be blamed for
believing, all the time, that he was laboring for his country and his
race.

If it has been inferred from what has been said of Mr. Lowington, of his
domestic afflictions, and of his views on the subject of discipline,
that he was an austere, cold, and unsympathizing man, a wrong impression
has been conveyed. The boys of the Brockway Academy, when they came to
know him, loved him as much as they respected him. He was not the man
needlessly to abridge the harmless enjoyment of youth, or to repress its
innocent hilarity. He watched the sports of the students with interest
and pleasure, and encouraged them by all the means in his power. He was
fond of humor, enjoyed a harmless joke, and had a keen appreciation of
juvenile wit. He was a good companion for the boys, and when they
understood him, he was always welcome to the play-ground.

The new ship had been duly christened Young America at the launching, by
Miss Josey Martyn--a name which was rapturously applauded by the boys.
She was one hundred and eighteen feet in length, and of about four
hundred tons burden. She had been built as strong as wood, iron, and
copper could make her. For a ship, she was small, which permitted her to
be light sparred, so that her juvenile crew could handle her with the
more ease. She had a flush deck; that is, it was unbroken from stem to
stern. There was no cabin, poop, camboose, or other house on deck, and
the eye had a clean range over the whole length of her. There was a
skylight between the fore and the main mast, and another between the
main and mizzen masts, to afford light and air to the apartments below.
There were three openings in the deck by which entrance could be
obtained to the interior of the ship: the fore hatch, the main hatch,
and the companion-way, the two former being used by the crew, and the
latter by the officers.

The between-decks, which is the space included between the upper and the
lower deck, was fitted up for the accommodation of the officers and
crew. Descending by the companion-way--which in the Young America
extended athwartships--on the right, at the foot of the stairs, was the
officers' cabin, occupying the part of the ship nearest to the stern.
This apartment was twenty-eight feet long, by fifteen in breadth at the
widest part, with four state rooms on each side. The mizzen mast passed
up through the middle of it. This cabin was richly but plainly fitted
up, and was furnished well enough for a drawing-room on shore. It was
for the use of the juvenile officers of the ship, fifteen in number, who
were to hold their positions as rewards of merit. The captain had a room
to himself, while each of the other apartments was to accommodate two
officers.

On the left of the companion-way, descending the stairs, was the "old
folks' cabin," as it was called by the students. It was in the locality
corresponding to that occupied by the ward room of a man-of-war. Though
the after cabin is the place of honor on board a ship, Mr. Lowington had
selected the ward room for himself and the teachers, in preference to
the after cabin, because it was next to the steerage, which was occupied
by the larger portion of the pupils, and because the form of the ship
did not contract the dimensions of the state rooms. This cabin was
twenty-two feet long and fifteen feet wide, with no waste room, as in
the after cabin, caused by the rounding in of the ship's counter. On the
sides were five state rooms, besides a pantry for the steward, and a
dispensary for the surgeon.

The forward room on the starboard side was occupied by Mr. Lowington
alone; the next on the same side by the chaplain and doctor; and each of
the three on the port side by two of the teachers. This cabin was
elegantly finished and furnished, and the professors were delighted with
its cheerful and pleasant aspect.

From the main cabin, as that of the "faculty" was called, were two
doors, opening into the steerage, fifty-two feet in length by fifteen
feet in width of clear space between the berths, which diminished to
nine feet abreast of the foremast. This apartment was eight feet high,
and was lighted in part by a large skylight midway between the fore and
main mast, and partly by bull's eyes in the side of the ship. There were
seventy-two berths, placed in twelve rooms, opening from passage-ways,
which extended athwartships from the main steerage, and were lighted by
the bull's eyes. There were no doors to these dormitories, each of which
contained six berths, in two tiers of three each. It was intended that
the six boys occupying one of these rooms should form a mess. Between
the gangways, or passages, were mess tables, which could be swung up
against the partition when not in use.

The steerage was neatly and tastefully fitted up, and furnished, though
not so elegantly as the cabins. It was to be the school room, as well as
the parlor and dining room of the boys, and it would compare favorably
with such apartments in well-ordered academies on shore. There was
plenty of shelves, pouches, and lockers, under the lower berths, and
beneath the bull's eyes at the head of the main gangways, for clothing
and books, and each boy had a place for every article which regulations
allowed him to possess.

Forward of the foremast there were two large state rooms; that on the
starboard side having four berths, for the boatswain, carpenter,
sailmaker, and head steward; and the one on the port side with six, for
the two cooks and the four under stewards, all of whom were men skilful
and experienced in their several departments. Forward of these was the
kitchen, from which opened the lamp room, a triangular closet in the bow
of the ship. Mr. Lowington had taken the idea of locating the cooking
apartment in the extreme forward part of the vessel from the Victoria
and Albert, the steam yacht of the Queen of England.

The hold beneath the berth deck contained the water tanks, bread room,
chain lockers, and a multitude of store rooms for provisions, clothing,
and supplies of every description needed on board during a long voyage.

The Young America was to be officered and manned by the students. They
were to work the ship, to make and take in sail, to reef, steer, and
wash down decks, as well as study and recite their lessons. They were to
go aloft, stand watch, man the capstan, pull the boats; in short, to do
everything required of seamen on board a ship. Mr. Lowington was to lure
them into the belief, while they were hauling tacks and sheets, halyards
and braces, that they were not at work, but at play. The labor required
of them was an essential element in the plan, by which the boys were to
obtain, the necessary physical exercise, and the discipline they so much
needed.

By the first of April the last of the students had reported to the
principal on board, and the professors, as the boys insisted upon
calling them, had taken possession of their state rooms. Though some of
the pupils had been on board nearly a month, the organization of the
ship had not been commenced; but classes had been formed in some of the
studies, by the teachers, and the pupils recited every day. The
boatswain had instructed the boys in rowing, and some temporary
regulations had been adopted for the eating and sleeping departments.
But not a boy had been allowed to go aloft, and nothing more than
ordinary school discipline had been attempted.

The boys, as boys always are, were impatient at this delay. They wanted
to be bounding over the ocean--to be on their way to some foreign port.
They were anxious to work, to climb the rigging, and stand at the wheel.
As yet they knew very little of the purposes of the principal, and had
but a faint perception of the life they were to lead in the Academy
Ship. It was understood that the officers were to be selected for their
merit, and that the ship, some time or other, was to cross the ocean;
but beyond this, all was darkness and uncertainty.

"To-morrow will be the first day of April," said George Wilton, as he
walked the deck of the Young America with Richard Carnes, a dignified
young gentleman of seventeen. "Mr. Lowington said we should go to work
on that day."

"If he said so, then of course we shall go to work," replied Carnes.

"I'm tired of waiting," added Wilton. "I think this is a stupid kind of
life. We are not even tied to a bell rope here."

"You will get discipline enough as soon as the crew are organized."

"I suppose we shall. Do you think we shall go to sea to-morrow?"

"Go to sea to-morrow!" exclaimed Carnes.

"Shuffles said so."

"How can we go to sea to-morrow? The crew don't know the mainmast from a
handspike. They couldn't do anything with the ship now; they don't know
the ropes."

"You do, Carnes."

"Well, I know something about a ship," replied the dignified young
gentleman, who had made one voyage up the Mediterranean with his uncle.

"I was pretty sure we should get out into blue water by to-morrow."

"Nonsense!"

"Shuffles said so."

"He is mistaken."

"What are we going to do?"

"I don't know? I'm content to wait till orders come."

"I don't want to wait any longer," added Wilton.

"What are you talking about, fellows?" asked Shuffles, joining them, as
they walked forward.

"Didn't you say we were going to sea to-morrow, Shuffles?" asked Wilton.

"Of course we are."

"Who says so?" demanded Carnes.

"All the fellows say so."

"It can't be true."

"Why not? We are not going to stay here forever."

"In my opinion, we shall stay here some weeks, if not some months,"
added Carnes.

"What for?"

"To pursue our studies, in the first place, and to learn our duty as
seamen, in the second."

"I don't believe I shall stay here a great while longer," said Shuffles,
with evident disgust. "There's no fun lying here."

"You can't help yourself," added Wilton.

"Perhaps I can't, but I can try," said Shuffles, as he glanced towards
the shore.

"All hands ahoy!" shouted Peaks, the boatswain, as his shrill whistle
rang through the ship.

The boys had been taught the meaning of this call, and they gathered in
the waist, eager to know what was to be required of them.

Mr. Lowington stood on the raised hatch over the main scuttle, where all
the students could see him. It was evident that he had some announcement
to make, especially as the following day had been assigned for
organizing the ship's company. The boys were silent, and their faces
betrayed the curiosity which they felt.

"Young gentleman," the principal began, "this ship will go into
commission to-morrow."

"Don't know what you mean, sir," said Paul Kendall as Mr. Lowington
paused to observe the effect of his announcement.

"I did not suppose that many of you would understand the expression. In
the navy, a ship is said to go into commission when the captain takes
his place on board, and the crew are organized for duty. When this
takes place, the ensign is hoisted. To-morrow, at twelve o'clock, we
shall display the colors at the peak. With us, going into commission
will only mean the organization of our school. From that time, we shall
observe the discipline of a man-of-war, so far as the ship and crew are
concerned."

"Shall we go to sea then?" asked Wilton.

"I think not," replied Mr. Lowington, laughing. "We shall not leave the
harbor till every officer and seaman knows his duty. You shall have
enough to do to-morrow, young gentlemen."

"When shall we be able to go to sea?"

"I don't know. There are many ropes in the ship, and you have a great
deal to learn before I shall be willing to trust you with the anchor at
the cat-head."

"What is the cat-head, sir?" asked Kendall

"Do you wish to go to sea without knowing what the cat-head is?" replied
the principal. "You shall know in due time. To-morrow we shall select
the officers, fifteen in number, who are to occupy the after cabin."

This announcement created a decided sensation among the eighty-seven
boys gathered in the waist, for the subject had been full of interest to
them. The after cabin had thus far been a sealed book; the door was
locked, and they had not even seen the inside of the apartment. They
were curious to visit this cabin, and to know who were to occupy it.

"After the organization of the school, it is my intention to give these
offices to those who obtain the highest number of merit marks, which
will be given for good conduct, good lessons, and progress in
seamanship. The best boy, who is at the same time the best scholar and
the best seaman, shall be captain. We have no marks now by which to make
the selection, and I intend to have you elect him the first time,
reserving to myself the right to veto your choice if it is obviously an
improper one."

As Mr. Lowington uttered this last remark, he glanced, perhaps
unconsciously, at Shuffles, who stood directly in front of him.

"Young gentlemen, the ballot will take place to-morrow morning, at nine
o'clock. I have given you this notice, that you may be able to consider
the matter and, if you choose, to make nominations for the several
offices," continued the principal.

"What are the offices, sir?"

"The first and most important one, of course, is the captain. The others
are four lieutenants, four masters, two pursers, and four midshipmen."

"What are they to do?" asked Kendall.

"I will not explain their duties now; it would require too much time. I
mentioned them in the order of their importance. Now, young gentlemen,
you should select your candidates for these offices by merit, not by
favor. I am aware that a few of you have been to sea, but probably none
of you are competent to handle a ship; and your choice should be based
mainly on good character and good conduct. I hope I shall be able to
approve the choice you may make. You are dismissed now."

"Three cheers for the principal!" shouted one of the boys.

"Silence, young gentleman! Let me say now, that no expressions of
approbation or disapprobation are to be allowed."

The boys separated into groups, and immediately gave their attention to
the important subject suggested to them by Mr. Lowington. It must be
acknowledged that violent symptoms of "log-rolling" began to be
exhibited. There were fifty, if not eighty-seven young men who wished to
be captain, and sit at the head of the table in the after cabin. Some of
them went down into the steerage, and in five minutes there was a
confused jabbering in every part of the ship.

"For whom shall you vote, Wilton?" asked Shuffles in a group of half a
dozen which had gathered around one of the mess tables.

"I don't know? whom do you go for?" replied Wilton.

"I rather think I shall go for Bob Shuffles. In my opinion, he is the
best fellow on board," replied the owner of that name.

"That's modest," laughed Wilton.

"Do you know of any fellow that would make a better captain than I
should?"

"You don't know the first thing about a ship."

"What odds does that make? I can learn as fast as anybody else."

"Do you expect every fellow to vote for himself?" asked Howe, another of
the group.

"Of course I don't; I expect them to vote for me," answered Shuffles,
with great good-nature.

"You are rather cheeky, Shuffles."

"What's the use of mincing the matter? Here we are, half a dozen of the
best fellows in the ship. We can't all be captain; but one of us can be
just as well as not."

"That's so," added Howe, approvingly. "But who shall that one be?"

"I am the one, without a doubt," said Shuffles.

"I don't see it," interposed Monroe, shaking his head; and he was the
young gentleman who had assisted the aspirant for the captaincy to rob
Mr. Lowington's favorite peach tree.

"What have you got to say about it, Ike Monroe? Do you expect us to go
for you?"

"I didn't say so."

"That's what you meant."

"I've just as much right to the place as you have, Bob Shuffles."

"Do you think you could make the fellows stand round as I can? But hold
on; fellows, don't let us fight about it. We are just the best six
fellows on board, and if we have a mind to do so, we can have this thing
all our own way," continued Shuffles.

"I don't see how," said Philip Sanborn.

"Don't you know how the politicians manage these things?"

"I don't."

"I'll tell you, then."

"But the principal said we must go according to merit, and elect the
fellows who were the best fitted for the offices," interposed Howe.

"Exactly so; that's just what we are going to do. I'm going to be
captain; can you tell me of any better fellow for the place?" demanded
Shuffles, who, putting aside the jesting manner in which he had
commenced the discussion, now assumed an earnest and impudent tone.

"Didn't you hear what Lowington said when he wound up his speech?" asked
Wilton.

"What?"

"About vetoing our choice if it was not a proper one."

"What of it?" asked Shuffles, innocently.

"Don't you think he would veto you?"

"Me! Not he! Lowington knows that I'm smart; I was too smart for him
once, and he knows it. He won't veto me. We have been the best of
friends lately."

"I don't believe he'll have a chance to veto you," said Wilton.

"What do you mean?"

"I don't believe you will be elected."

"I know I shall, if we manage it right. Let us look at it," continued
Shuffles, as he took a pencil from his pocket. "Got a piece of paper?"

Monroe gave him a piece of paper, and the wire-puller began to make his
calculations.

"Eighty-seven votes," said he, writing the number on the paper.
"Necessary to a choice, forty-four. Here are six votes to start with."

"For whom?" asked Monroe.

"For me, for captain, first, and for each of the others for whatever
place he wants; say for Wilton for first lieutenant; Howe for second,
Sanborn for third, Monroe for fourth, and Adler for first master. What
do you say to that, fellows?"

As with the political "slate," there was some difference of opinion in
regard to the minor officers, even after Shuffles' claim to the
captaincy had been conceded But this disposition of the spoils was
finally agreed to.

"Now we want thirty-eight more votes," Shuffles proceeded.

"Just so; and you might as well attempt to jump over the main royal yard
as to get them," added Adler, who, having been assigned to the office
lowest in rank, was least satisfied with the "slate."

"Hold on; we haven't done yet. There are nine more offices. Now we will
pick out some good fellow that will work for us, for each of these
places; then we will promise him six votes if he will go our ticket, and
do what he can for us."

"That will give us only fifteen votes," said Adler.

"I think that will be doing very well to start with. Then you five
fellows can electioneer for me, and I'll do the same for you."

"I think we have made one mistake," added Sanborn. "Most of the fellows
will go for Carnes for captain. He is an old salt, and has more
influence than any other student in the ship. We ought to offer him some
place."

"Make him purser, if you like," said Shuffles, contemptuously.

"That won't go down. Make him first lieutenant."

"And shove me out?" demanded Wilton, indignantly. "I don't see it!"

"Nor I," added Shuffles. "I won't vote for Carnes, any how. He's a snob
and a flunky."

It was useless to resist the fiat of the chief wire-puller; the ticket
remained as it had been originally prepared; and the young gentlemen
proceeded to distribute the rest of the offices.




CHAPTER III.

THE ENSIGN AT THE PEAK.


The students on board of the Young America were between the ages of
fourteen and seventeen. By the regulations, no boy under fourteen or
over seventeen could be admitted, and they averaged about fifteen. They
had, therefore, reached the years of discretion. Among them were a great
many who were disposed to be wild boys, and not a few who had found it
difficult to remain in similar institutions on shore. They were not
criminal or depraved, but simply wild; with a tendency to break through
reasonable restraint; with a taste for mad pranks, and a contempt for
authority.

Of this class, who were a trial and a torment to the teachers of the
ordinary high schools and academies, the larger proportion would have
scorned to steal, or commit any wanton outrage upon the persons or
property of others. There were many high-minded, noble-hearted young
men, who could not tamely submit to authority, and were prone to
insubordination, and who only needed the right kind of discipline to
make them earnest and faithful men and useful citizens. There were few,
if any, dunces or blockheads among them, for a life on shipboard had no
attractions for such boys. They were, almost without an exception,
wide-awake, bold, daring fellows, who had a taste for stirring events;
fellows who wanted to climb the Rocky Mountains, visit the North Pole,
and explore the Mammoth Cave. They were full of fun and mischief and it
would have been easy at any time to get up a party among them to march
the principal's cow into the parlor of the Academy; to climb to the
belfry on a winter's night, and fill the inverted bell with water, where
it would freeze solid before morning; or to convey the occupants of the
hen-coop to the recitation room.

It was Mr. Lowington's task to repress the mischief in these boys, to
keep them occupied with work and play, and to develop their moral and
mental capacities. He had doubtless taken a heavy load upon himself but
he felt that he was to labor for his race and his country. At least one
half of his students were too wild to attend the ordinary public or
private schools, or to profit by them if admitted. With such material,
his work could not be a sinecure. But he had a taste for it, and he gave
his whole heart and soul to the performance of his duties.

When the students were gathered on board the Young America, they were
mostly strangers to him, though he had communicated personally or by
letter with the parents of all of them. He had read and listened to the
stories of their pranks and peccadilloes, but when they came together,
he hardly knew one from another, and was not prejudiced against any
individual by the terrible accounts of him related by parents,
guardians, or teachers. He purposed to give them the opportunity to
select their own officers at first, in order to win a more cheerful
obedience from them, and because the students knew each other better
than he knew them.

After the announcement of the principal that the voting would commence
on the following morning, nothing else was talked of on board. The
qualifications of various members of the school were discussed by groups
of excited voters; and we must do them the justice to say that most of
them considered the matter unselfishly and with a single eye to the
public good. Perhaps it is a little remarkable that not a single
student, outside of the little group of wire-pullers that gathered in
the steerage, thought of Shuffles for the position of captain; and the
"log-rollers" were likely to have up-hill work in electing themselves to
the six principal offices. But they went to work, and labored very
diligently till bed-time in carrying their point.

While none thought of Shuffles in connection with the highest position,
many mentioned the dignified young gentleman, who had made one voyage up
the Mediterranean--Richard Carnes. He had been on board a fortnight, and
had won and retained the respect of all his companions.

Before the little band of wire-pullers in the steerage had made up the
"slate" to suit their minds, the crowd on deck had agreed upon Richard
Carnes for captain, and were busy in discussing the qualifications of
others for the subordinate offices, when the log-rollers separated, and
went to work upon their mission.

"How are you going to vote for captain, Kendall?" said Wilton, stopping
up to the young gentleman who had proposed so many questions to the
principal, and who had been so honest in confessing his ignorance of
nautical matters.

"For Carnes, of course."

"Humph! I wouldn't vote for him," sneered the wire-puller.

"Why not?"

"He's too stiff; he'll put on airs, and be a tyrant over us."

"No, he won't."

"You see if he don't. I say, Kendall, are you up for any office?"
continued Wilton, with a certain appearance of slyness which the
straightforward young gentleman did not exactly like.

"Am I?"

"Yes, you. Wouldn't you like a room in the after cabin?"

"Perhaps I would," answered Kendall, thoughtfully; and the place was
certainly very inviting to him.

"They say the after cabin is a perfect little palace."

"I dare say it is."

"You can just as well go in there, if you like."

"I don't see how that can be. I don't think I'm fit to be an officer. I
am from Cincinnati, and I never saw a ship till I came east three weeks
ago."

"None of the fellows know anything about a ship. All of us will have to
learn."

"Carnes knows all about one."

"No, he don't. He made one voyage, and knows just enough to talk salt.
He's a good fellow enough, but he isn't fit for captain. If you want to
be an officer, Kendall, and have a berth in the after cabin, you can,
just as well as not."

"Well, I would like such a place; I can't deny it; but I don't think the
fellows will go for me."

"They will, if you say so."

"If I say so! I'm not going to ask them to vote for me," replied
Kendall, warmly; for he was no politician and had a vein of modesty in
his composition.

"You needn't say a word to any one. If you will go for our ticket, it
will be all right. Half a dozen of us have talked this matter over, and
we have concluded that you would be the best fellow for second master."

"Have you?" asked Kendall, who could not help being gratified to learn
that even half a dozen of his companions had thought him worthy to be an
officer of so high a rank as second master. "I'm very much obliged to
you."

"All you have to do, is to go for our ticket."

"What do you mean by your ticket?" demanded Kendall, who was rather
confused by the technical terms of the wire-puller.

Wilton explained that his little party had selected a candidate for each
of the offices; and if all the fellows agreed to it, there would be
fifteen votes for their ticket, to begin with.

"Well, what is your ticket?" demanded Kendall, impatiently. "If they are
all good fellows, I will go for them. Of course you mean to vote for
Carnes for captain."

"Not exactly," replied Wilton, with evident disgust. "We shall put up a
better fellow than he is for captain."

"Why, all the boys are going for him," added Kendall, astonished to find
there were any who did not believe in Carnes.

"No, they are not."

"I thought they were."

"He will not be elected, and you need not throw your vote away upon him,
because, if you don't want a place in the after cabin, there are plenty
of fellows who do," added the wire-puller, with apparent indifference.

"But I do want it."

"Then all you have to do, is to go for our ticket."

"I think Carnes will make the best captain."

"Very well; if you think so, you have a right to your own opinion. I
haven't any mortgage on it."

"Whom are you going to run for captain?"

"It's no use to talk any more about it, if you are going for Carnes,"
replied Wilton, as he turned to move away.

The wire-puller was playing a part. Paul Kendall was a noble little
fellow, and was already a great favorite on board, not only with the
boys, but with the principal and the professors. Wilton knew that he had
a great deal of influence, and it was important to secure him for their
ticket. If he could tell others that Kendall was going for their men, it
would induce many to join their party. The "favorite," though he was an
honest, noble-hearted fellow, was still human, and a berth in the after
cabin was a strong temptation to him.

"I'm not going to say I'll vote for a fellow till I know who he is,"
added Kendall. "If he's the right person, perhaps I'll go for him,
though I wanted to see Carnes captain."

"Carnes can't be elected, I tell you. We are going against him."

"Whom are you going for, then?"

"For Bob Shuffles," replied Wilton, desperately, for he did not wish to
mention his candidate till he had won the assent of his companion.

"Shuffles!" exclaimed Kendall, with something like horror mingled with
his astonishment; "I shall not go for him, anyhow."

"Why not?"

"I don't think he is the right person for the place."

"I do; he's a first-rate fellow--none of your milk and water chaps, that
swallow camels and strain at gnats."

Kendall had some decided objections to Shuffles, and he positively
refused to vote for him, even to obtain the coveted position in the
after cabin. Wilton argued the matter with much skill and cunning; but
his logic and his eloquence were both wasted.

"Well, if you won't go for Shuffles, you must be content with your place
in the steerage," added Wilton.

"I won't go for him, any how," said Kendall, firmly.

"You are making a mistake."

"I don't think so. I'm bound to vote for the best fellow, and I'm sure
Shuffles isn't the right one."

"See here, Kendall; don't say a word to the others that I spoke to you
of this little matter. I thought you would go with us, or I shouldn't
have said anything to you."

"Not say anything? Why not?"

"Because it will be better to keep still."

"I shall not do anything of the kind. You have got up a plan to defeat
Carnes, by giving the offices to fellows who will vote against him. You
wish me to keep still, while you carry out your plan. I can see through
a cord of wood, when there's a hole big enough."

"I mentioned this thing to you in confidence."

"You didn't say a word about confidence; and I didn't promise to keep
still. I won't keep still. I think it is a mean trick to buy up the
votes of the fellows, and I'll blow the whole thing higher than a kite."
     
"You'll catch it if you do," said Wilton, in a threatening tone.

"Catch what?" demanded Kendall, with a very pretty exhibition of
dignity.

"Bob Shuffles will give it to you."

"Give what to me?"

"Give you the biggest licking you ever had in your life," answered
Wilton, angrily, "You are so stupid, you can't understand anything."

"I think I can understand the licking, when if comes. That's a game that
two can play at."

"What do you mean, you little bantam? Do you think you can whip Bob
Shuffles?"

"I had no idea of whipping him; and I have no idea of his whipping me,
either."

Kendall was spunky. Wilton could make nothing of him by threats or
persuasion; and he turned away from him to seek a more promising field
of labor. Kendall took off his cap, scratched his head as he reflected
upon the event which had just transpired, and made up his mind that it
was an insult to an independent elector to attempt to buy his vote with
the paltry consideration of an office. He was sorry that he had been
even tempted by the proposition of the wire-pullers, and thankful that
his sense of honor and decency had prompted him to decline it when asked
to vote for an improper person. True to his promise, he made all haste
to expose the conspiracy, as he regarded it, against Carnes.

When the students turned in that night, the wire-pullers had found a
sufficient number of candidates for all the offices on the terms set
forth in the compact, each of whom had promised to use his influence for
the entire ticket. Shuffles had made a very pretty calculation, to the
effect that each of the fifteen candidates could influence at least two
votes besides his own for the ticket, which would inevitably elect it.
But during all this time Paul Kendall had been laboring like a Trojan
for Carnes, and had induced his friends to do the same.

At nine-o'clock in the morning, the polls were opened for the election
of officers. A box was placed on the fife-rail, at the mainmast, in
which the ballots were deposited, under the inspection of Professor
Mapps.

"Have all the students voted?" called the professor, when the voting
was suspended. "If so, I declare the poll closed."

It was a moment of intense excitement on the spar deck of the Young
America when Mr. Lowington stood up on the hatch to announce the vote.
There was a pleasant smile upon his face, which indicated that it would
not be his painful duty to veto the choice of the independent electors.

"Young gentlemen, your balloting appears to have been conducted with
entire fairness," said he, "and I will proceed to declare the result.
Whole number of votes, eighty-seven; necessary to a choice, forty-four.
Paul Kendall has five; Charles Gordon has seven; Robert Shuffles has
twenty-two; Richard Carnes has fifty-three, and is elected captain of
the Young America for the succeeding three months."

The party who had worked and voted for Carnes applauded the result most
lustily, and gave three cheers for the new captain, which, on this
exciting occasion, were not objected to by the principal. Shuffles's jaw
dropped down, and his lip quivered with angry emotion.

"That little whipper-snapper of a Kendall did that," said Wilton, in a
low tone, to the disappointed candidate. "I was afraid of this when I
saw him blowing about the deck."

"I'll settle it with him when I get a good chance," growled Shuffles, as
he went to the rail and looked over into the water, in order to conceal
his disappointment and chagrin.

"Young gentlemen will bring in their votes for first lieutenant," said
Professor Mapps, as he placed the box on the fife-rail again.

The boys marched around the mainmast, and deposited their ballots for
the second officer, as they had done before. The friends of Shuffles
rallied again, hoping that something might yet come of the compact they
had made with him, and gave him their votes for first lieutenant,
though, in his chagrin, he declared that he would not accept the
position. Fortunately for him, he was not called upon to do so; for
Charles Gordon was elected by a very large majority. As the election
proceeded, it became evident that there was no office for Shuffles. Paul
Kendall was elected fourth lieutenant and the announcement of the vote
was greeted by even more hearty applause than had been bestowed upon the
captain.

At the conclusion of the balloting, Shuffles found that not a single one
of the wire-pullers, or of the candidates nominated by them, had been
elected. The attempt to bribe the independent voters, by giving them
office, had been a signal failure; and it is to be hoped that Young
America, when fully developed, will stick to his principles.

"Captain Richard Carnes," said Mr. Lowington, as he stepped upon the
hatch, after the voting had been concluded.

The young gentleman thus addressed came forward, blushing beneath the
honors which had been bestowed upon him. The principal took his hand.

"Captain Carnes, I congratulate you upon your election to the highest
office in the gift of your companions; and I congratulate your
fellow-students also upon having so good a young man to handle the ship.
You have been modest, and they have been wise. I congratulate you both.
Young gentlemen, I am satisfied that your captain will be just,
courteous, and gentlemanly, in his relations with you; and I hope you
will yield a willing and cheerful obedience to his orders, and to those
of all your superiors. Let me say that this business is not a farce; it
is not mere boys' play; for as soon as the officers and crew are fully
trained and instructed, all ship duty will be carried on without
assistance from me or others. When necessary, I shall advise the captain
what to do, but I shall not do it myself; neither shall I needlessly
interfere with the discipline of the ship.

"This is the last time an election of officers will be permitted, for it
is liable to many objections, not the least of which are the bribery and
corruption by which some have attempted to obtain office."

Mr. Lowington looked at Shuffles, as though he knew all about the method
to which he had resorted to secure an election; but we are quite sure
that Paul Kendall had never lisped a word of it to him, or to any of the
instructors.

"On the first day of July, young gentlemen, all the offices will be
vacant; and they will be awarded strictly in accordance with the marks
you may obtain. There will be no veto upon the result of the merit roll.
These places, therefore, are open to all. We have no aristocracy on
board. Every student in the ship is a candidate for the captaincy. Now,
if the officers elect will follow me to the after cabin, I will install
them into their new positions; after which I will proceed to organize
the crew."

The door of the after cabin, which had hitherto been a mystery to all
the boys, was unlocked by the head steward, and Mr. Lowington, followed
by the officers, entered. The students on deck were ordered forward, and
were not even permitted to look down the companion-way, for the
principal intended to keep the after cabin exclusively for the officers;
and no one not entitled to admission was to be allowed to cross its
threshold. He believed that this mystery, and this rigid adherence to
the division line between officers and crew, would promote the
discipline of the ship, and enhance the value of the offices--the prizes
for good conduct, and general fidelity to duty.

"Captain Carnes, this is your state room," continued Mr. Lowington,
opening the door of the room farthest forward on the starboard side. "As
the commander of the ship you are entitled to an apartment by yourself."

"Thank you, sir," replied the captain, as he stepped into the room.

"You will find on the hooks your uniform as captain. There are three
suits, from which you will select one that fits you."

Captain Carnes entered and closed the door. If he did not feel like a
king, he ought to have felt so.

Mr. Lowington then gave the next room to the first and second
lieutenants, who were to occupy it together; and they were also directed
to clothe themselves in the uniforms deposited there for their use. The
third state room was given to the third and fourth lieutenants, and the
fourth to the first and second midshipmen. The forward room of the port
side was assigned to the first and second masters; the next to the third
and fourth; the third to the two pursers, and the last to the third and
fourth midshipmen.

In a short time the officers came out of their rooms clothed in their
uniforms, which consisted of a blue frock coat, with brass buttons, and
blue pants. The cap was of the same material, with a gold band around
it. Thus far the uniforms were all alike; but there were distinguishing
insignia to indicate the rank of each. All the officers had
shoulder-straps, by which their positions were designated. The captain
had two anchors; the first lieutenant had one anchor, with four stars,
one above, one below, and one on each side; the second lieutenant had
the anchor with three stars--none above; the third lieutenant, one star
on each side of the anchor; and the fourth lieutenant one star below the
anchor. The captain also wore five narrow gold bands on each of his coat
sleeves; the first lieutenant four, and so on, the fourth wearing but
one band.

The shoulder-straps of the masters contained no anchor; only the stars,
one for each grade, the first master having four stars; the fourth only
one. The rank of the pursers was indicated by the outline of a
parallelogram for the second, and two of the same figure, one within the
other, for the first. The straps of the midshipmen contained gilt
numbers, from one to four, designating their grade.

The officers presented a very elegant and dashing appearance in their
new uniform; and if some of them did not feel a little vain, it was
because they were less human than boys usually are.

"What are we to do, sir?" asked Kendall of the principal, after the
uniforms had been duly criticised.

"Nothing, at present."

"Nothing! Why, I feel like a counterfeit gold dollar, in this rig, when
I know no more about a ship than I do about the inside of the moon."

"You will learn in due time. You will go on deck now, young gentlemen;
and remember that, as officers, you are not to be familiar with the crew
while you are on duty."

"Can't we speak to them?" asked Kendall, who was not disposed to be so
exclusive as naval discipline required him to be.

"Not while you are on duty, except when it is necessary to do so. We
will now assign the berths in the steerage to the crew."

As the boys came on board, they had taken the berths as they pleased.
Shuffles had selected a room, and invited his "cronies" to occupy the
bunks it contained with him. The berths were now to be distributed by
lot. Professor Mapps had provided seventy-two slips of paper, on each of
which he had written a number. The boys were mustered into line, and
drew out these numbers from the package. As each student drew his slip,
the purser wrote down his name in a book, with the number he had drawn.

In the steerage, each berth had its own number, which was also applied
to a locker, and a seat at one of the mess tables. When the drawing was
completed each student had his berth, his clothes locker, and his seat
at meals. Many of them were extremely dissatisfied when they found that
they had been separated from their "cronies;" but the principal was
firm, and would not allow a single change to be made.

By this time it was twelve o'clock, and Boatswain Peaks piped all hands
to muster. The ensign was hoisted, and saluted with three cheers, in
which all hands, young and old, joined. When this ceremony was finished,
the crew were piped to dinner, and the officers went to their cabin,
where the steward had set the table for them for the first time. They
dined like lords, though upon the same fare as their companions in the
steerage.




CHAPTER IV.

OFFICERS AND SEAMEN.


After dinner the organization of the crew was continued. All hands were
"piped to muster," and by this time most of those who had been
disaffected at the drawing of berths had recovered their natural
equanimity, and all were intensely interested in the arrangement of the
details. None of the boys knew what was coming, and their curiosity kept
them in a continuous state of excitement.

"All who have drawn even numbers will take the starboard side of the
ship," said Mr. Lowington from his perch on the hatch. "All who have
drawn odd numbers will take the port side."

"This is the starboard side, my lads," added Mr. Fluxion, the instructor
in mathematics--who, like the principal, had been a naval officer,--as
he pointed to the right, looking forward.

Some had already forgotten their numbers, and there was considerable
confusion before the order could be obeyed.

"Young gentlemen, the books will be opened to-day; and a student who
forgets his number again will lose a mark," said Mr. Lowington. "Are
they all in their places, Mr. Fluxion?"

"They are, sir," replied the instructor, who had just counted them.

"Young gentlemen, you are thus divided into two equal parts--the
starboard and the port watches. Now form a straight line, toe the crack,
and call your numbers in order, beginning with the starboard watch."

The boys eagerly followed this direction, though some assistance was
required from the instructors in repressing their superfluous
enthusiasm.

"Very well," continued Mr. Lowington, when the students were formed in
two lines. "Every boy in the starboard watch whose number is divisible
by four, step forward one pace. Number three in the port watch, do the
same. Mr. Mapps, oblige me by seeing that every alternate boy in the
line steps forward."

"The line is formed, sir," replied the instructor, when he had carried
out the direction of the principal.

"Each watch is now divided into two parts--the first and second parts,
as they will be called. Now, young gentlemen, the clothing will be
distributed, and each student will put on his uniform at once."

The four lines were then marched down into the steerage, each under the
charge of an instructor, to a particular locality, where the head
steward and his assistants had deposited the clothing for each watch and
quarter watch. The uniform consisted of blue seaman's pants and a heavy
flannel shirt or frock, such as is worn in the United States navy. To
each student the following articles were served out:--

1 pea-jacket.
1 blue cloth jacket.
1 pair blue cloth pants.
1 pair blue satinet pants.
1 blue cap.
1 straw hat, of coarse, sewed straw.
1 Panama hat, bound.
2 knit woollen shirts.
2 pair knit woollen drawers.
2 white frocks.
2 pair white duck pants.
4 pair socks.
2 pair shoes.
2 black silk neck-handkerchiefs.

These articles were given to the boys, and they were required to put on
the every-day uniform; after which they were directed to arrange the
rest of the clothing in the lockers belonging to them. The contractor
who had furnished the goods was present with four tailors, to attend to
the fitting of the clothes, which were all numbered according to the
size. In a short time the students began to come out of their rooms,
clothed in their new rig. They looked intensely "salt," and there was no
end to the jokes and smart things that were said on this interesting
occasion. Even Shuffles hardly knew himself in his new dress.

The frock had a broad rolling collar, in each corner of which was worked
an anchor in white. The black silk neck-handkerchief was worn under the
collar, and not many of the boys had acquired the art of tying the
regular sailor's knot. Boatswain Peaks not only stood up as a model for
them, but he adjusted the "neck gear" for many of them. Bitts, the
carpenter, and Leech, the sailmaker, who were also old sailors,
cheerfully rendered a valet's assistance to such as needed help.

Agreeably to the directions of Mr. Lowington, the shore suits of the
students were done up in bundles, each marked with the owner's name, and
the head steward took them to Mr. Lowington's house for storage.

Rigged out in their "sea togs," the students began to feel salt, as well
as to look salt. Some of them tried to imitate the rolling gait of the
boatswain when they walked, and some of them began to exhibit an
alarming tendency to indulge in sea slang.

"There, my hearty, you look like a sailor now," said Peaks, when he had
rolled over the collar and tied the square knot in the handkerchief of
Wilton.

"Shiver my timbers, but I feel like one," laughed the embryo seaman.

"What's that, young gentleman?" demanded Mr. Lowington, who happened to
be within hearing; "what did you say?"

"I said I felt like a sailor, sir."

"What was the expression you used?"

"I only said shiver my timbers, sir."

"You stole that expression from a yellow-covered novel. Did you ever
hear Mr. Peaks, who has been a sailor all his lifetime, use such
language?"

"I'll be bound he never did," added Peaks.

"No, sir. I don't know that I ever did."

"Some sailors do use such expressions; but it is gross affectation for
these young gentlemen, who never saw a blue wave, to indulge in them. If
you please, Wilton, you will not use such language. It is simply
ridiculous. Mr. Peaks, you will pipe all hands to muster again."

The shrill whistle of the boatswain sounded through the ship, and the
boys tumbled up the ladders, eager to learn what was to be done next. As
they formed in lines, they presented a novel and picturesque appearance
in their jaunty uniform. Most of them had already learned to wear their
caps canted over on one side, and not a few of them, perhaps as much
from necessity as because it was a sailor's habit, hitched up their
trousers, and thrust their hands deep down into the side pockets.

The students were again formed in watches and quarter watches, each of
which classes and sub-classes was indicated on the uniforms. All the
starboard watch wore a small silver star on the right arm, above the
elbow, and the port watch the same emblem on the left arm. The first
part of each watch had a figure 1, under the star, and the second part a
figure 2 in the same position.

The rest of the day was spent in the organization for ship's duty, which
was far from completed when the sun went down. The next day every boy
was kept so busy that he had no time to grumble. The instructors
attended to the lessons in the steerage with one watch, while the other
was on deck acquiring seamanship. In the course of the month, as the
boys learned their duties, and the capabilities of each were
ascertained, they were assigned to their stations in the various
evolutions required in working the vessel.

Boatswain Peaks had taught the boys, a few at a time, how to set a
sail, reef and furl it. They had been gradually accustomed to going
aloft, until the giddy height of the main royal did not appall them, and
they could lay out on the yards without thinking of the empty space
beneath them. By the first of June, all the petty officers had been
appointed, and every student had his station billet. When the order was
given to unmoor ship, to make sail, or to furl the sails, every one knew
where to go and what to do. The station billets were cards on which the
various evolutions of the ship had been printed in a column on the left,
while the particular duty of the owner of the card was written against
it. The card was kept by the student, and he was expected to learn its
contents so that he could take his place without stopping to consult it,
when an order was given. Here is a specimen of the cards:--

+---------------------------------------------------------+
|PORT WATCH, NO 21,              WILLIAM FOSTER,          |
|Second Part.            _Captain of the Forecastle._     |
+----------------------+----------------------------------+
|REEFING.              |Head Bowlines.                    |
|TACKING OR WEARING.   |Forecastle. Let go head bowlines. |
|                      |  Let go and shorten in foretack  |
|                      |  and belay it.                   |
|GETTING UNDER WAY.    |Head Bowlines. Downhauls and      |
|                      |  head-sheets.                    |
|ANCHORING.            |Head Bowlines, Sheets and Tacks.  |
|                      |  Downhauls.                      |
|LOOSING SAILS.        |Foretopmast Staysail.             |
|FURLING.              |Head Bowlines and Downhauls,      |
|                      |  Staysail.                       |
|MOORING AND UNMOORING.|Forecastle.                       |
|BOAT.                 |Professor's Barge, stroke-oar.    |
|MESS.                 |No. 11.                           |
+----------------------+----------------------------------+

The crew had been in training a month before an attempt was made to set
more than one sail at once; but by this time the officers knew the
orders, having practised every day since the organization. The petty
officers had been appointed, and had, to some extent, become familiar
with their duties.

The boys still continued to wonder when the Young America would go on a
cruise, for they were very anxious to see the blue water, and to roll on
the great waves of the Atlantic; but they were so constantly occupied
with ship's duty and their studies, that the time did not hang heavily
on their hands. Two months of constant practice had made tolerable
seamen of them, and the discipline of the ship went on regularly. The
young officers, as Mr. Lowington had promised, began to conduct the
evolutions and give the orders.

On the 1st day of June, after breakfast, the students were thrown into a
fever of excitement by an unusual order, and they ventured to hope that
the ship was to leave her moorings.

"Mr. Gordon, you will pipe all hands to muster," said Captain Carnes to
the first lieutenant.

"Pass the word for the boatswain," added Gordon to one of the
midshipmen, who stood near him.

This call was answered, not by Peaks, who no longer performed the duties
of boatswain, but by one of the students, who had been appointed to this
position.

"Pipe all hands to muster, boatswain," said the first lieutenant, as the
petty officer touched his cap to him.

"All hands on deck, ahoy!" shouted the boatswain, as he piped the call.

This was an unusual order for that time of day, the forenoon being
appropriated to study for each watch in turn; and those who were below
hastened on deck to ascertain what was to be done.

"All hands, stations for loosing sail!" piped the boatswain, when
ordered to do so by Gordon.

The first lieutenant was in charge of the ship, under the direction of
the captain. The second lieutenant stood on the forecastle, where he was
attended by the boatswain. The third lieutenant was in the waist, and
the fourth on the quarter deck, near the mizzenmast. These were the
stations of the officers whenever all hands were called. Mr. Lowington
and the instructors stood near the companion-way, watching with interest
this first attempt to make sail all over the ship.

"Lay aloft, sail-loosers!" shouted Gordon; and his order was repeated by
the officers at their several stations.

The little tars who belonged on the topsail and top-gallant yards sprang
up the rigging like so many cats, excited beyond measure by the scene of
activity around them.

"Lower yardmen in the chains!" continued Gordon and his order was
passed, along by the officers. "Aloft, lower yardmen!"

In a moment the crew were in their places; the studding-sail booms were
triced up with the usual system, so that the sails could be reached.

"Lay out!" continued the first lieutenant; and the boys walked out on
the foot-ropes to their stations on the yards. "Loose!"

The ropes by which the sails were secured to the yards were removed at
this order, and the topmen held the sails in their places.

"All ready on the forecastle, sir," reported Foster, who was captain of
that part of the ship.

"All ready in the foretop."

"All ready in the maintop."

"All ready in the mizzentop," reported the several captains of the tops,
in their proper order.

These reports were passed to the first lieutenant in charge of the deck,
by his subordinates.

"Let fall!" shouted Gordon, highly excited; and the sails dropped from
the yard. "Overhaul your rigging aloft! Man sheets and halyards! Sheets
home, and hoist away!"

These orders were passed from mouth to mouth among the officers, and
return reports made, according to the strict discipline of the navy.
They were promptly executed by the crew, though of course not without
some blunders; and the Young America was covered with her cloud of
canvas. Mr. Lowington commended the officers and crew for the promptness
and skill they had displayed in their first concerted attempt at making
sail. He then directed Captain Carnes to furl. Both evolutions were then
repeated, until a proficiency satisfactory for one day was attained.

"Not going to sea, after all," said Shuffles, when the crew were
dismissed from muster.

"No," replied Wilton. "I'm tired of lying here, and if we don't go to
sea soon, I shall take myself off."

"I'm with you."

"I thought we were going to have some fun on board, but we don't do
anything but study and shake out topsails."

"Do you know how you stand on marks, Wilton?" asked Shuffles.

"No; not very high, though."

"Don't you think you shall get into the cabin next term?"

"I know I shall not. I haven't tried for anything."

"On the first of next month, you know, new officers will be appointed,
and I suppose the crew will be messed over again."

"I don't care, I'm getting tired of this thing, I had a better time at
the Academy before we came on board."

"There isn't much chance for any sport. Hardly a fellow has been allowed
to go on shore since we joined the ship."

"Well get up a mutiny, if things don't improve."

"I was thinking of that very thing myself," said Shuffles, in a low
tone.

"A mutiny!" exclaimed Wilton, who had used the word in jest.

"Just for fum, you know," laughed Shuffles.

"You don't mean any such thing?"

"Not yet, of course."

"Do you at any time?"

"We want something more exciting than this kind of a life. Here we are,
kept down and treated like common sailors. We have to touch our caps and
make our manners to Dick Carnes and the rest of the flunkies in the
after cabin. My father pays as much for me as Dick Carnes' father does
for him, and I don't think it is fair that he should live in the cabin
and I in the steerage."

"If you get marks enough, you can have a berth in the cabin," replied
Wilton.

"Marks! Confound the marks! I'm not a baby. Do you think a fellow
seventeen years old is going to be put up or put down by marks?" said
Shuffles.

"I thought you had been working for a place in the cabin."

"So I have, but I don't expect to get it. I never studied so hard in my
life, and I believe I haven't had a bad mark since I came on board,
Lowington thinks I have reformed," laughed Shuffles. "And so I have."

"What do you want to get up a mutiny for, then?"

"I shall not, if I get a decent position; if I don't, I'm going in for
some fun."

"But do you really think of getting up a mutiny?" asked Wilton,
curiously.

"I was thinking the other day what a fine thing it would be if our
fellows had the ship all to themselves."

"What could we do with her?"

"Go on a cruise in her."

"We couldn't handle her; there is hardly a fellow on board that knows
anything about navigation."

"Of course, I don't mean to do anything yet a while; not this year,
perhaps. One of these days, if we stay on board, we shall know all about
a ship. Fifteen or twenty of the fellows are studying navigation. We are
going to Europe some time or other. When we do, we can take the ship,
and go it on our own hook."

"I don't believe you mean anything of the kind, Bob Shuffles."

"I've been thinking about it, anyhow. We can lock Lowington and the rest
of the old folks into their cabin while they are at dinner; and there
are enough of us to handle Peaks and Bitts."

"I think you are crazy, Shuffles."

"We should have a high old time if we could get possession of the ship.
We wont say a word about it yet."

"I think you had better not."

"We might go round Cape Horn into the Pacific, and have a splendid time
among the beautiful islands of the South Sea."

"Of course all the fellows wouldn't join you."

"We could put those ashore somewhere who did not agree with us."

"You know the penalty of mutiny on the high seas."

"Bah!" said Shuffles, contemptuously. "It would be nothing but it lark.
No one would think of hanging us, or even sending us to prison for it.
My father is rich enough to get me out of any scrape."

"So is mine; but I don't think it would be quite safe to go into a
mutiny."

"Not yet, my dear fellow. You can think it over."

"But I'm tired of this kind of a life. I liked it first rate in the
beginning. Do you think Lowington really intends to go to sea with the
ship?"

"I know he does."

"If he don't go pretty soon, I shall run away, and go to sea in
earnest."

"Don't say a word about the mutiny at present, Wilton. By and by, if
things go right, or if they don't go right, we may want to take some
stock in such an enterprise."

"I don't see it yet, but of course I shall keep still."

It is doubtful whether even so daring a young man as Shuffles, who had
the temerity to do almost anything, seriously contemplated getting up a
mutiny. Very likely his untamed and vicious imagination had revelled in
such an enterprise; had pictured the delights of the rover's life at
sea; but a boy of ordinary common sense could hardly think of engaging
in such a mad scheme.

The last week of June, with which month ended the first school term on
board of the Young America, was devoted to examinations and reviews in
all the studies for which extra marks were given. On the last day the
instructors made up the merit lists, and on the morning of the 1st of
July all hands were mustered, and the result declared. Most of the
officers, all of whom had studied with unremitting diligence in order to
retain their positions, were reinstated in their offices. The third
lieutenant, however, fell out, having failed in his reviews, and to the
astonishment of all, Robert Shuffles was found to be entitled to the
place. The first and second lieutenants exchanged ranks, and Paul
Kendall fell to the position of second master. Three of the tenants of
the after cabin were compelled to move into the steerage, and three of
the crew were transferred to the officers' quarters.

Many were disappointed, and perhaps some were disheartened, for the
competition had been a severe struggle; and as much depended upon
natural ability as upon energy and perseverance. But the Young America
was a world by herself. She had all the elements of society within her
wooden walls, and success and failure there followed the same rules as
in the great world of which she was an epitome.

After the officers had been duly installed in their positions, the petty
offices were given to those having the highest number of marks among the
crew. It was certainly democratic for the late third lieutenant to
become captain of the foretop, and for a second master to become
coxswain of the professors' barge; but these young gentlemen, though
disappointed, submitted with a good grace to their misfortune.

The student having the highest number of marks among the crew was
allowed to have the first choice of berths in the steerage; the one
having the next highest number had the second choice, and so on, until
all the numbers had been appropriated. At the conclusion of the
reorganization, Mr. Lowington made a speech, "comforting the mourners,"
and reminding all the students that, on the 1st of October, there would
be another distribution of the places of honor. He hoped those who had
failed to attain what they aspired to reach would not be discouraged,
for, after all, they had been gaining knowledge, and thus the real end
of the school had been reached.

"How about the mutiny?" said Wilton to the new third lieutenant, when
both were off duty in the evening.

"It won't pay just now," replied Shuffles, with great good humor.

"I suppose not," sneered Wilton, who had not even won a petty office.
"What would Lowington say if he knew the third lieutenant talked of
getting up a mutiny on board?"

"What would he say?" repeated Shuffles, who was as much surprised at the
high rank he had gained as his companion had been.

"Yes; what would he say if I should tell him of it?"

"He would say you were a mean pup for telling tales out of school; at
least, he ought to say so, and I think he would. Lowington is a pretty
good fellow, after all."

"No doubt he is, now you are third lieutenant."

"You needn't snuff at it, Wilton. If you want a place, why don't you
sail in, and get one. Just look out for your marks; that's all you have
to do."

"Marks! I thought a fellow seventeen years old was not to be put up or
put down by marks," said Wilton, bitterly.

"That depends somewhat upon whether you get in or out," laughed
Shuffles.

"I suppose you and Paul Kendall will be fast friends now," added the
discontented student.

"Kendall behaves very well, and has treated me first rate since I went
into the cabin."

"I suppose if I want to run away, you will stop me now."

"If you are going to do that, you musn't tell me of it, now I'm an
officer," replied Shuffles, as he turned on his heel, and walked aft.

Wilton was disgusted, and felt that he had lost his best friend, now
that Shuffles had worked his way into the cabin.




CHAPTER V.

OUR FELLOWS.


"I would like leave of absence for to-morrow, Mr. Pelham," said Wilton,
as he touched his cap to the first lieutenant of the Young America, on
the day before the Fourth of July.

"I am sorry to inform you, Wilton, that no leave of absence will be
granted to-morrow," replied Pelham in accordance with the instructions
given him by the captain, who, in turn, had received his orders from the
principal.

"No leave!" exclaimed Wilton, his jaw dropping down.

"Such are the orders."

"I have always been in the habit of celebrating the Fourth of July,"
replied Wilton. "Are we to stay on board the ship, and mope all day?"

"I presume the day will be celebrated on board in a proper manner,"
added the first lieutenant.

"On board! What can a fellow do here? We might as well go to bed, and
sleep off the day."

"No words are necessary, Wilton," replied Pelham as he turned and walked
away.

"That's a good one!" added Wilton, to the group of boys who had come
with him to the mainmast, to request the same favor, if the spokesman
was permitted to go on shore and celebrate the day.

"Not to celebrate!" exclaimed Monroe, with something like horror in his
tones and looks.

"Work on the Fourth of July!" chimed in Adler.

"I won't stand it, for one!" said Wilton.

"Nor I, for another," added Monroe.

So said half a dozen others.

"Well, what are you going to do about it?" demanded Adler. "Here we are,
and we can't get ashore."

"Perhaps we can," said Wilton, as he led the way to a retired part of
the deck, where they could talk without being overheard. "Did any one
ever hear of such a thing as keeping the fellows on board on the Fourth
of July? Why, every little Greek in the city yonder has his liberty on
that day; and we are to be cooped up here like a parcel of sick
chickens! I suppose we shall have to recite history and French, and
shake out topsails, as usual."

"It's outrageous. I don't believe the fellows will stand it," added
Adler, who did not know how bad the case was, until it had been
rehearsed by Wilton, who, in the absence of Shuffles, had become the
leader of a certain clique on board, given to taking opposite views.

"But I don't see what we can do," said Monroe.

"We will do something. I won't stand it. If I stay on board the ship
to-morrow, it will be as a prisoner," answered Wilton.

"It's a hard case; but what can we do about it?" asked Sanborn.

"Suppose we go to Lowington, and state the case to him," suggested
Adler.

"What's the use of that? Of course the first lieutenant spoke by the
card. He had his orders to say what he did, and I'm sure they came from
Lowington."

"There can be no doubt of that; but it would be better to have it from
him."

"I'm willing to ask Lowington for the day, if the fellows want me to do
so; but it won't do any more good than it would to bark at the
mainmast," continued Wilton. "I have an idea in my head, if the fellows
will stand by me," he added, in a lower tone, as he looked over the rail
at the swinging boom, to which the boats in constant use were made fast.

"What is it?" asked Monroe, eagerly.

"Keep shady, for a while. How many fellows can we muster?"

"I don't know."

"Well, don't stir the matter yet. Here comes Lowington and we will talk
to him first. Come, fellows, let's make a dive at him."

Wilton, attended by his companions, walked up to the principal, as he
was going forward. Touching his cap respectfully, as the discipline of
the ship required, he opened the case.

"Mr. Lowington, some of the students would like to go on shore
to-morrow, to celebrate the Fourth. Can't we have liberty?"

"You know the rule; you should apply to the first lieutenant for leave
of absence," replied Mr. Lowington.

"We have, sir, and been refused."

"Then there is nothing more to be said. The first lieutenant speaks with
authority."

"I beg your pardon, sir, but are we to stay on board all day to-morrow?"

"That is certainly the arrangement, Wilton."

"Some of us would like to celebrate the day, sir, and we think it is
rather hard to be obliged to do duty on the Fourth of July."

"I intend to have the day celebrated in a proper manner. I have made
preparations for a gala day on board."

"If you please, sir, we would rather go on shore."

"I am very sorry, for your sake, that I shall be unable to reverse the
answer of the first lieutenant. If I permit one or a dozen to go ashore,
I cannot refuse any, and all must go. I think the boys will be satisfied
with the arrangements I have made for the day."

"I never was kept in school on the Fourth of July before, sir," growled
Wilton.

"Then this will be a new event in your experience," answered Mr.
Lowington, coldly, as he turned from the petitioners, and went forward.

There were a great many wild boys on board of the Young America, and it
was morally impossible for the whole crew to attend the celebration in
the city, without more or less of them getting into a scrape. They had
been kept on board for two months, and not allowed to go on shore,
except under the supervision of one of the instructors; and to let any
considerable number of them loose on such a day as the Fourth of July,
would only be courting trouble, for they would be all the more
disorderly after the long period of restraint.

Mr. Lowington did not willingly deprive the boys of any innocent
gratification. He had faithfully considered the matter of celebrating
the day, and taken the advice of the instructors on the subject. It had
been proposed to procure a band of music, and visit the city in a body,
under the usual discipline; but there were many difficulties attending
such a plan. The boys were all the sons of rich men, and most of them
were abundantly supplied with pocket money. As it would be impossible to
prevent the escape of some of them from the procession, in the crowded
streets, it was feared that their money would prove to be "the root of
all evil." The project had finally been abandoned; and, as a substitute,
a programme for a celebration on board had been arranged, for there the
students would be entirely under the control of the instructors, who
would check all excesses. It was anticipated that a few discontented
spirits would grumble, but no rebellion was expected.

Wilton and his companions were dissatisfied, and disposed to be rash.
They felt that they had been harshly and cruelly denied a reasonable
privilege. The subject of celebrating the Fourth had been under
consideration for a long time among the boys, and it had been generally
believed that all hands would be permitted to go on shore, with perfect
liberty, on that day; and many of them had already arranged their plans
for the occasion.

"Well, what do you think now?" said Wilton, as Mr. Lowington walked
forward.

"I think it's too bad," replied Adler. "It is meaner than dirt to make
us stay on board on the Fourth of July."

"But I don't see how we are going to help ourselves," added Monroe,
looking at Wilton for a solution of this difficult problem.

"I do."

"How?"

"Keep still; don't say a word here," continued Wilton. "Scatter, now,
and I will be on the top-gallant forecastle in a few minutes."

Wilton strolled about the deck a short time, and then went to the place
of meeting, where he was soon joined by the rest of the discontented
pupils.

"How many fellows can we muster?" asked he, when his associates in
mischief had again gathered around him.

"I know at least a dozen, who are up to anything," replied Monroe; "but
some of them are in the other watch. What are you going to do?"

"I'll tell you: There are the professors' barge and the third cutter at
the swinging boom. We will drop into them when the instructors go down
to supper, and make for the shore. All the rest of the boats are at the
davits; and before they can get them into the water, we shall be out of
their reach. What do you think of that for a plan!"

"I think it is a first-rate one. But hadn't we better wait till the
instructors turn in?" suggested Adler.

"No; the boats will all be hoisted up to the davits at sunset. We must
do it while the professors are at supper, or not at all. We want eight
oars for the barge, and six for the third cutter; that makes fourteen
fellows. Can we raise as many as that?"

"Yes, I think we can; we will try, at any rate."

"But you must look out, or some fellow will blow the whole thing," added
Wilton. "Mind whom you speak to."

The trustworthiness of the various students was canvassed, and it was
decided what ones should be invited to join the enterprise. The
discontented boys separated, and went to work with great caution to
obtain the needed recruits. Unfortunately, in such a crowd of young men,
there are always enough to engage in any mischievous plot, and it is
quite likely that twice as many as were wanted could have been obtained
to man the boats in the runaway expedition.

Wilton missed Shuffles very much in arranging the details of the present
enterprise. While at the Brockway Academy, they had plotted mischief so
often that each seemed to be necessary to the other. But Shuffles had
reformed; he was now third lieutenant of the ship, and it was not safe
to suggest a conspiracy to him, for he would attempt to gain favor with
the principal by exposing or defeating it.

Yet Shuffles was so bold in thought, and so daring in execution, that
Wilton could hardly abandon the hope of obtaining his assistance;
besides, the third lieutenant would be officer of the deck when the
professors went to supper, and might wink at their departure in the
boats, if he did not actually help them off.

"Would you say anything to Shuffles?" asked Wilton, still in doubt, of
Monroe, as they happened to meet again in the waist.

"To Shuffles!" exclaimed Monroe, in an energetic whisper.

"I mean so."

"Certainly not. I should as soon think of speaking to Lowington
himself."

"But Shuffles may join us. He is always in for a good time."

"Why, you ninny, he is third lieutenant of the ship."

"No matter if he is. I think Shuffles would like to join us."

"Nonsense! He has been in office only three days, and it would break
him. He would be degraded to the steerage," replied Monroe, who could
not help thinking that Wilton was beside himself in proposing such a
thing, and that the enterprise was doomed to failure in such incompetent
hands.

"If he won't join us, perhaps he will help us off. He is officer of the
deck, you know, in the second dog watch."

"I know he is; but don't you open your mouth to him. If you do, I'll
back out at once."

"Back out?"

"Yes, back out. I believe you are crazy. Why don't you go to Captain
Carnes, and done with it?" said Monroe, with energy.

"I haven't any hold on Carnes, and I have on Shuffles."

"What do you mean?" asked the prudent conspirator, curiously.

"If Shuffles won't join us, he won't blow on us, you may depend upon
that. He wouldn't dare to do it. I could break him before sundown, if I
chose," said Wilton, with conscious power.

"That alters the case."

"Of course, I shouldn't think of saying anything to him, if I did not
know what I was talking about. I have him where the hair is short, and
he knows it, as well as I do."

"What is it, Wilton?"

"No matter what it is. When a thing is told me in confidence, I keep it
to myself; but if he turns traitor to his cronies, he must look out for
breakers. He knows what it is."

"Well, if you can get him, he will be a first-rate fellow to have."

"I think I can get him. Here he comes; you keep out of the way, and I
will see how deep the water is."

Monroe went forward to find a student to whom he had been deputed to
speak in the interest of the enterprise leaving Wilton to grapple with
the old lion of mischief, whose teeth, however, seemed to have been worn
out in the cause.

"What's up, Wilton?" demanded the third lieutenant who was now off duty,
and therefore allowed to speak to the crew, though it was a privilege of
which the officers seldom availed themselves.

"Who said anything was up?" asked Wilton.

"You look as though you meant something. What were you and Ike Monroe
talking about just now?" continued Shuffles. "About me, I'll be bound,
for you kept looking at me, as though you meant something."

"What makes you think so? Have you heard anything?" asked Wilton,
fearful that the plot had leaked out.

"Not a word? I only judged by your looks."

"I suppose if anything was up, you wouldn't have anything to do with it
now."

"Most decidedly, I should not. I like my present position too well to
fall out of it. I'm going to be captain next term, if I can fetch it any
way in the world."

"You mean to be a flunky, just like the rest of them. You are not the
same fellow you used to be."

"Yes, I am."

"You are getting too big for your boots."

"You wrong me, Wilton. I'm just as good a fellow as I ever was. I think
I'm the best fellow in the ship, and for that reason I want to be
captain. I'm ahead of Carnes so far on marks this month."

"Well, if you want to be the head flunky, I hope you'll get it. We are
not going ashore to-morrow, they say," added Wilton, changing the topic
to get nearer to the business of the hour.

"So Pelham told me."

"Are you willing to stay on board and study, and do ship's duty, on the
Fourth of July?"

"We are going to celebrate."

"How?"

"I'm sure I don't know."

"We shall celebrate to-morrow just as we do every day--as close
prisoners on board the ship. I, for one, don't like it, and I won't
stand it."

"Won't you?" laughed Shuffles.

"When I say I won't, I mean so."

"O, you do--do you?"

"You better believe I do," added Wilton, shaking his head resolutely.

"What are you going to do?"

"I'm going ashore, by hook or by crook."

"Better not get into any scrape."

"You say that as one of the flunkies."

"Well, you had better not say anything to me, for I shall have to do my
duty as an officer. Don't say anything to me, and then I shall not know
anything about it."

"Humph!" sneered Wilton, not pleased with this non-committal policy.

"I don't want to do anything mean with any of our fellows; so don't say
a word to me. I shall do my duty as an officer, as I promised to do when
I was made third lieutenant."

"Do you mean to say you will stop me, Shuffles, if you see me going?"
demanded Wilton.

"I do mean so; I promised faithfully to do my duty as an officer, and I
shall do it."

"See here, Bob Shuffles; you needn't talk to me in that manner. I knew
the ship's cable from a pint of milk, and you can't come the flunky over
me."

"I'm going to do just as you would do if you were in my place. I won't
hear a word about any of your plans."

"But will you interfere with them?"

"If it is my duty to do so, I shall. I intend to obey orders; and if I
have the deck, I shall keep things straight, whatever happens."

"Lowington don't know you as well as I do."

"No matter if he don't; he shall have no fault to find with me this
term, if I can help it."

"It's no use for me to mince the matter with you, Bob Shuffles. We
understand each other too well for that. Something's up."

Shuffles turned on his heel, and was about to walk away.

"Hold on a minute, Shuffles," continued Wilton. "I won't tell you what's
up, but I'll tell you this; if you interfere with what I do, or with
what the fellows with me do, I'll tell Lowington about the mutiny--I
will, as sure as your name is Bob Shuffles. Do you understand me?"

"Well, I do; and it seems to me that sounds very much like a threat."

"Call it what you like. If you turn traitor to our fellows, you must
stand the racket of it. You are not a saint just yet, and those that
live in glass houses musn't throw stones."

"I believe I haven't played false to any of our fellows. If I don't
choose to get into any scrape with them, I have a right to keep out.
That's all I've got to say."

"But what are you going to do, Shuffles? Our fellows will want to know."

"I'm going to do my duty," replied the third lieutenant as he walked
away, regardless of the efforts of his companion to detain him.

Shuffles was experiencing the truth of the old maxim, that honesty is
the best policy. It is to be regretted that his present devotion to duty
had no higher incentive than mere policy; but it may be hoped of those
who do their duty from low motives, that they may gather inspiration
even from their politic fidelity to obey its behests from higher
motives. The third lieutenant of the Young America intended to keep the
promise he had made in accepting his office, simply because it would pay
best.

Wilton and his confederates had no difficulty in making up the required
number of discontents and malcontents before six o'clock, which was the
time fixed for carrying out the enterprise they had planned. Some of the
recruits joined because they anticipated a good time in the city in
celebrating the Fourth, and others from a mere love of mischief and
excitement. The details of the scheme had been carefully elaborated by
Monroe and Wilton, after the ranks of the conspirators were full. Having
learned a valuable lesson from the daily discipline of the ship, the
mischief was certainly well planned. Each boy was assigned to a
particular position in the boats, and knew on what thwart he was to sit,
and which oar he was to pull.

Wilton and Monroe, as the master spirits of the enterprise were to run
out first on the swinging boom, and slide down the painters, each into
the boat he was to command. The others were to follow in the same way,
descending from the boom, for it was not considered prudent to run the
boats up to the gangway, where some enthusiastic officer might easily
interfere with the plan, which was to depend for its success upon the
celerity of its execution.

When four bells struck, the professors went down to their evening meal,
as usual, and the boatswain piped the port watch to supper, the
starboard watch having taken theirs at three bells, or half past five.
Wilton gave a low whistle, when Shuffles, officer of the deck, was abaft
the mizzenmast, with his back to the runaways who had gathered in the
waist, and were waiting for the signal.

"Be lively, fellows," said the leader of the enterprise, as he sprang
over the rail, and ran out on the boom, followed by Monroe.

The others, in the order in which they had been instructed, did the
same. About half of them were on the boom, when the movement was
reported to the officer of the deck by the midshipman on duty in the
waist. Shuffles rushed forward, now understanding, for the first time,
the intentions of Wilton; and true to the inspiration of fidelity, he
set about defeating the object of "our fellows."

The studding-sail boom, to which the boats were fastened, was supported
by a topping-lift from above, and kept in position, at right angles with
the side of the ship, by guys extending forward and aft.

"Stand by that fore guy!" shouted Shuffles, as he sprang upon the rail.
"Cast off!"

"Lively, fellows!" said Wilton, when he saw that the third lieutenant
intended to swing in the boom to the ship's side.

"Stand by the after guy of the studding-sail boom!" continued Shuffles,
with becoming energy.

Both his orders were promptly obeyed; but seeing that his movement would
be too late, he rushed to the topping-lift, and cast it off, causing the
swinging boom to drop into the water, just as the last boy was about to
slide down into the professors' boat. Of course the luckless fellow went
into the water; but he was promptly picked up by his companions in
mischief.

"If I'm caught, Bob Shuffles, you look out for breakers!" cried Wilton,
as the third lieutenant appeared at the gangway again.

The tide was coming in, and the boats swung so far abaft the boom that
it had fallen clear of them when it dropped into the water. Wilton and
Monroe were prompt to avail themselves of their present success, and the
boys sat in the boats, with their oars up, ready to pull as soon as the
order was given.

"Let fall!" said Wilton; and the eight oars of the professors' barge
dropped into the water, and the rowers placed them in readiness for the
first stroke.

Monroe, in the third cutter, followed the example of his principal, and
was hardly a second behind him.

"Give way!" added Wilton.

"Give way!" repeated Monroe; and the two boats gathered way and darted
off towards the nearest point of the shore.

Thus far the enterprise of "our fellows" was entirely successful, and
Shuffles stood on the gangway, chagrined at the defeat which had
attended his efforts to prevent the escape of the runaways.

"Stand by to clear away the first cutter!" shouted he, suddenly and with
energy, as he made his way to the davits, where the boat indicated was
suspended.

"Cast off the gripes, and man the falls!" he continued when the watch
were collected at the scene of action. "Mr. Kendall, you will inform
the captain what has happened."

Within three minutes, the first cutter was in the water, for the crew
had been frequently exercised in the evolution of lowering boats, and
performed it with remarkable facility for boys. Before the first cutter
touched the water, the captain, the principal, and all the professors,
came on deck.

Mr. Lowington was entirely cool, though everybody else appeared to be
intensely excited. The crew of the first cutter were piped away, and at
the principal's suggestion, the third lieutenant was sent off in the
boat to prevent the landing of the rebellious pupils.

"Up oars! Let fall! Give way!" said Shuffles, in the boat, delivering
his orders in rapid succession; and the first cutter darted off in chase
of the runaways.




CHAPTER VI.

THE FOURTH OF JULY.


The first cutter was manned by her regular crew, who had been trained
with the utmost care to pull together, while Wilton, in the professors'
barge, which was of the same size, had some very indifferent oarsmen.
The runaways had made up their force of such material as they could
obtain, and though all were somewhat accustomed to rowing, they had not
been drilled to work together; they were not the unit of power in
pulling a boat. Shuffles, therefore, had a manifest advantage, and he
was determined to bring back the fugitives.

The second cutter, in charge of Paul Kendall, was cleared away, and,
with Mr. Lowington and Mr. Fluxion on board, left the ship to take part
in the pursuit. The chase promised to be an exciting one, for Wilton and
Monroe were straining every nerve to reach the shore before they were
overtaken. They were making for the nearest land, and having just the
number of hands required to pull the boat, each of them was obliged to
use an oar himself. They had no coxswains, and Wilton, at the bow oar of
the professors' barge, could not see what was ahead, though he kept the
pursuing boats in full view.

The nearest land, not more than half a mile from the ship, was a point
covered with salt marsh, above which was a cove, whose opening was about
ten rods in width. Wilton was making for the point below the cove, but
his calculations were made without judgment or discretion. If he reached
the land, his party would be obliged to walk a mile in order to get
round the cove, on a narrow strip of marsh, where they might be
intercepted. But the fatal defect in his plan of operations was a
failure to consider the depth of water between the ship and the point.
The flow of the tide from the cove, while it kept a clear channel
through the entrance, had formed a bar off the tongue of land on the
seaward side of it, which was bare at half tide, and was now just
covered. Wilton was pulling for this bar, with all the strength of his
crew.

Shuffles was prompt to observe the mistake of his late crony, and just
as prompt to profit by it. The first cutter was gaining rapidly on the
chase; but Shuffles, as she reached the border of the main channel,
ordered his coxswain to keep the boat's head towards the entrance of the
cove.

"We shall never catch them on this tack," said the coxswain of the
cutter, who knew nothing about the bar.

"I think we shall," replied the third lieutenant, confidently.

"We are not going towards the point."

"That's very true, and the professors' barge will not go much farther in
that direction. Pull steady, my lads; don't hurry yourselves. There is
plenty of time."

The coxswain thought his superior officer was taking the matter very
coolly, and knowing of the intimacy which had formerly subsisted between
Shuffles and Wilton, he was ready to conclude that the third lieutenant
was willing to permit the escape of "our fellows." While he was putting
this construction on the conduct of his superior, the professors' barge
"took the ground," and stuck fast.

"They're aground, Mr. Shuffles," said the coxswain.

"There's just where I expected them to be," answered Shuffles, quietly.

"Shall I run towards them?"

"No; keep her as she is. There isn't more than a foot of water anywhere
between them and the point."

The third cutter, being a smaller boat than the professors' barge, did
not touch the bar as soon as her consort; but Monroe saw that his craft
could not land her party on the point at that stage of the tide, and he
ordered his crew first to lay on their oars, and then to back water.
Wilton's boat was aground at the bow, and when he had sent part of his
crew aft, she was easily pushed off the bar. By this delay he had lost
the chance of landing at the point, and his only alternative was to pull
up to the cove; but in doing so, it would be impossible to avoid the
first cutter, which had now secured a position off the mouth of the
little bay.

"Stand by to lay on your oars," said the coxswain of the first cutter,
as directed by the lieutenant in command. "Oars!"

The crew ceased rowing, and laying on their oars, waited the next
movement of the runaways. In the mean time the second cutter was well
away from the ship, and Mr. Lowington, promptly comprehending the
intentions of the third lieutenant, directed the officer in command to
pull towards the boats on the bar, keeping well to seaward, in order to
prevent them from escaping in that direction.

Wilton realized that he was cornered, and hoping that Shuffles would not
be over-zealous in the discharge of his duty, directed his course
towards the opening of the cove. A few strokes brought him within
hailing distance of the first cutter.

"No use, Wilton," said Shuffles, laughing. "You may as well pull for the
ship. It's all up with you."

But the leader of the runaways, instead of heeding this good advice,
attempted to push by astern of the first cutter.

"Stern, all! Give way!" shouted Shuffles, sharply. "Coxswain, stand by
with your stern line!"

It was generally understood that the third lieutenant of the Young
America was a fighting character, and that he could whip any officer or
seaman in the ship, though his prowess had not been practically
demonstrated. Shuffles took the stern line himself, instead of
intrusting the duty to the coxswain. He intended to grapple the bow of
the professors' barge, and make fast to it with the rope; but the cutter
did not gather way enough in season to do this. As she backed, she
fouled the oars of the barge, and Shuffles secured a firm hold of her
stern.

"What are you doing, Bob Shuffles?" demanded Wilton, angry, when he saw
that his late crony was fully in earnest.

The third lieutenant made no reply; but passing his rope through a ring
in the stern of the barge, he made it fast, and then pushed the cutter
off from her. When the line had run out about a fathom, he secured the
end he held in his hand to the after thwart of his own boat. Thus the
first cutter and the barge were lashed together, stern to stern.

"Cast off that rope!" shouted Wilton to the stroke oarsman in the barge.

"Don't you touch it, my lad," interposed Shuffles, when the boy
attempted to obey the order of his leader. "If you attempt it, you will
purchase a sore head."

[Illustration: THE ESCAPE FROM THE SHIP. Page 95.]

The third lieutenant had picked up a boat-hook, and stood ready to rap
any of the barge's crew who might attempt to cast off the line by which
the boats were fastened together. No one was disposed to cross the
purposes of so formidable a person as Shuffles, and the stroke oarsman
did not obey the order of Wilton. It would not be safe to do so.

"Now, Wilton, what do you say?" demanded Shuffles, a smile of triumph
playing upon his face, which was very aggravating to the leader of the
runaways. "Will you go back to the ship, or not?"


He had never given up his watching, nor his hope of some day seeing a
big baby-bringer. He searched his sky patch now. But could see only the
darting sparrows and, farther away, some larger birds that wheeled
gracefully above the city. Many of these were seagulls. The others were
pigeons, and Cis had told him that people ate them. This fact hurt him,
and he tried not to think about it, but only of their flight. He envied
them their freedom in the vast milkiness, their power to penetrate it.
Beyond the large birds, and surely as far away as the sun ever was, some
great, puffy clouds of a blinding white were shouldering one another as
they sailed northward.

Out of the wisdom possessed by one of her advanced age, Cis had told him
several astonishing things about this field of sky. What Barber
considered a troublesome, meddlesome, wasteful school law was, at
bottom, responsible for her knowing much that was true and considerable
which Johnnie held was not. And one of her unbelievable statements (this
from his standpoint) was to the effect that his sky patch was constantly
changing,--yes, as frequently as every minute--because the earth was
steadily moving. And she had added the horrifying declaration that this
movement was in the nature of _a spin_, so that, at night, the whole of
New York City, including skyscrapers, bridges, water, streets, vehicles
and population, _was upside down in the air_!

"Aw, it ain't so!" he cried, though Cis reminded him (and rather
sternly, for her) that in doing so he was questioning a teacher who drew
a magnificent salary for spreading just such statements. "And if they
pay her all that money, they're crazy! Don't y' know that if we was t'
come upside down, the chimnies'd fall off all the buildin's? and East
River'd _spill_?"

Cis countered with a demonstration. She filled Big Tom's lunch pail with
water and whirled it, losing not a drop.

But he went further, and proved her wrong--that is so far as the
upside-down of it was concerned. He did this by staying awake the whole
of the following night and noting that the city stayed right-side up
throughout the long hours. Cis, poor girl, had been pitifully
misinformed.

But the changing of the sky he believed. He believed it because at night
there was the kind of sky overhead that had stars in it; also,
sometimes, a moon. But by dawn, the starred sky was gone--been left
behind, or got slipped to one side; in its place was a plain,
unpatterned stretch of Heaven which, in due time, was once more
succeeded by a firmament adorned and a-twinkle.

When Cis returned home one evening and declared that the forewoman at
the factory had asserted that there were stars everywhere in the sky by
day as well as by night, and no plain spots at all anywhere; and,
further, that if anybody were at the bottom of a deep well he--or
she--could see stars in the sky in the daytime, Johnnie had fairly
hooted at the tale. And had finally won Cis over to his side.

Her last doubt fled when, having gone down into a dark corner of the
area the Sunday following, she found, as did he, that no stars were to
be seen anywhere. After that she believed in his theory of starless
sky-spots; starless, but not plain. For in addition to the sun, many
other things lent interest to that field of blue--clouds, rain, sleet,
snow, and fog, all in their time or season. Also, besides the birds, he
occasionally glimpsed whole sheets of newspapers as they ambitiously
voyaged above the house tops. And how he longed for them to blow against
his own window, so that he might read them through and through!

Sometimes he saw a flying machine. The first one that had floated across
his sky had very nearly been the death of him. Because, forgetting
danger in his rapturous excitement, he had leaned out dangerously, and
might have fallen if he had not suddenly thought of Grandpa, and thrown
himself backward into the kitchen to fetch the wheel chair. The little
old soldier had only been mildly diverted by the sight. Johnnie,
however, had viewed the passing of the biplane in amaze, though later on
he came to accept the conquest of the air as just one more marvel in a
world of marvels.

But his wonder in the sky itself never lessened. About its width he did
not ponder, never having seen more than a narrow portion of it since he
was big enough to do much thinking. But, oh, the depth of it! He could
see no sign of a limit to that, and Mrs. Kukor declared there was none,
but that it reached on and on and on and on! To what? Just to more of
the on and on. It never stopped.

One night Cis and he, bent over the lip of the window, she upholstered
on a certain excelsior-filled pillow which was very dear to her, and he
padded by Big Tom's cast-offs, had attempted to realize what Mrs. Kukor
had said. "On--and on--and on--and on," they had murmured. Until finally
just the trying to comprehend it had become overpowering, terrible. Cis
declared that if they kept at it she would certainly become dizzy and
fall out. And so they had stopped.

But Johnnie was not afraid to think about it, awful as it was. It was
at night, mostly, that he did his thinking. At night the birds he loved
were all asleep. But so was Barber; and Johnnie, with no fear of
interruption, could separate himself from the world, could mentally kick
it away from under him, and lightly project his thin little body up to
the stars.

Whenever fog or clouds screened the sky patch, hiding the stars, a
radiance was thrown upon the heavens by the combined lights of the
city--a radiance which, Johnnie thought, came from above; and he was
always half expecting a strange moon to come pushing through the cloud
screen, or a new sun, or a premature dawn!

Now looking up into the deep blue he murmured, "On--and--on--and on," to
himself. And he wondered if the gulls or the pigeons ever went so far
into the blue that they lost their way, and never came back--but just
flew, and flew, and flew, till weariness overcame them, when they
dropped, and dropped, and dropped, and dropped!

A window went up in front of him, across the area, and a voice began to
call at him mockingly: "Girl's hair! Girl's hair! All he's got is girl's
hair! All he's got is girl's hair!"

He started back as if from a blow. Then reaching a quick hand to the
sash, he closed the window and stepped down.

The voice belonged to a boy who had once charged Mrs. Kukor with going
to church on a Saturday. But even as Johnnie left the sill he felt no
anger toward the boy save on Mrs. Kukor's account. Because he knew that
his hair _was_ like a girl's. If the boy criticized it, that was no more
than Johnnie constantly did himself.

The second his feet touched the splintery floor he made toward the
table, caught up the teapot, went to lean his head over the sink, and
poured upon his offending locks the whole remaining contents of the
pot--leaves and all. For Cis (that mine of wisdom) had told him that
tea was darkening in its effect, not only upon the lining of the tummy,
which was an interesting thought, but upon hair. And while he did not
care what color he was inside, darker hair he longed to possess. So, his
bright tangles a-drip, he set the teapot in among the unwashed pans and
fell to rubbing the tea into his scalp.

And now at last he was ready to begin the really important matters of
the day.

But just which of many should he choose for his start? He stood still
for a moment, considering, and a look came into his face that was all
pure radiance.

High in the old crumbling building, as cut off from the world about him
as if he were stranded with Grandpa on some mountain top, he did not
fret about being shut in and away; he was glad of it. He was spared the
taunts of boys who did not like his hair or his clothes; but also he had
the whole flat to himself. Day after day there was no one to make him do
this, or stop his doing that. He could handle what he liked, dig around
in any corner or box, eat when he wished. Most important of all, he
could think what he pleased!

He never dwelt for any length of time upon unhappy pictures--those which
had in them hate or revenge. His brain busied itself usually with places
and people and events which brought him happiness.

For instance, how he could travel! And all for nothing! His calloused
feet tucked round the legs of the kitchen chair, his body relaxed, his
expression as rapt as any Buddhist priest's, his big hands locked about
his knees, and his eyes fastened upon a spot on the wall, he could
forsake the Barber flat, could go forth, as if out of his own body, to
visit any number of wonderful lands which lay so near that he could
cross their borders in a moment. He could sail vast East Rivers in
marvelous tugs. He could fly superbly over great cities in his own
aeroplane.

And all this travel brought him into contact with just the sort of men
and women he wanted to know, so politely kind, so interesting. They
never tired of him, nor he of them. He was with them when he wanted to
be--instantly. Or they came to the flat in the friendliest way. And when
its unpleasant duties claimed him--the Monday wash, the Tuesday ironing,
the Saturday scrubbing, or the regular everyday jobs such as dishes,
beds, cooking, bead-stringing, and violet-making--frequently they helped
him, lightening his work with their charming companionship, stimulating
him with their example and praise.

Oh, they were just perfect!

And how quiet, every one of them! So often when the longshoreman
returned of an evening, his bloodshot eyes roving suspiciously, a crowd
of handsomely dressed people filled the kitchen, and he threaded that
crowd, yet never guessed! When Big Tom spoke, the room usually cleared;
but later on Johnnie could again summon all with no trouble whatever,
whether they were great soldiers or presidents, kings or millionaires.

Of the latter he was especially fond; in particular, of a certain four.
And as he paused now to decide upon his program, he thought of that
quartet. Why not give them a call on the telephone this morning?

He headed for the morris chair. Under its soiled seat-cushion was a
ragged copy of the New York telephone directory, which just nicely
filled in the sag between the cushion and the bottom of the chair. He
took the directory out--as carefully as if it were some volume not
possible of duplication.

It was his only book. Once, while Cis was still attending school, he had
shared her speller and her arithmetic, and made them forever his own
(though he did not realize it yet) by the simple method of photographing
each on his brain--page by page. And it was lucky that he did; for when
Cis's brief schooldays came to an end, Big Tom took the two textbooks
out with him one morning and sold them.

The directory was the prized gift of Mrs. Kukor's daughter, Mrs.
Reisenberger, who was married to a pawnbroker, very rich, and who
occupied an apartment (not a flat)--very fine, very expensive--in a
great Lexington Avenue building that had an elevator, and a uniformed
black elevator man, very stylish. The directory meant more to Johnnie
than ever had Cis's books. He knew its small-typed pages from end to
end. Among the splendid things it advertised, front, back, and at the
bottom of its pages, were many he admired. And he owned these whenever
he felt like it, whether automobiles or animals, cash registers or
eyeglasses. But such possessions, fine as they were, took second place
in his interest. What thrilled him was the list of subscribers--the
living, breathing thousands that waited his call at the other end of a
wire! And what people they were!--the world-celebrated, the fabulously
wealthy, the famously beautiful (as Cis herself declared), and the
socially elect!

Of course there was still others who were prominent, such as
storekeepers, prize fighters, hotel owners and the like (again it was
Cis who furnished the data). But Johnnie, as has been seen, aimed high
always; and he was particular in the matter of his telephonic
associations. Except when shopping, he made a strict rule to ring up
only the most superior.

There was a clothesline strung down the whole length of the kitchen.
This Johnnie lowered on a washday to his own easy reach. At other times
it was raised out of the way of Big Tom's head.

He let the line down. Then pushing the kitchen chair to that end of the
rope which was farthest from the stove and the sleeping old man, he
stood upon it; and having considered a moment whether he would first
call up Mr. Astor, or Mr. Vanderbilt, or Mr. Carnegie, or Mr.
Rockefeller, decided upon Mr. Astor, and gave a number to a priceless
Central who was promptness itself, who never rang the wrong bell, or
reported a busy wire, or cut him off in the midst of an engrossing
conversation.

This morning, as usual, he got his number at once. "Good-mornin', Mister
Astor!" he hailed breezily. "This is Johnnie Smith.--'Oh, good-mornin',
Mister Smith! How are y'?'--I'm fine!--'That's fine!'--How are you,
Mister Astor?--'Oh, I'm fine.'--That's fine!--'I was just wonderin',
Mister Smith, if you would like to go out ridin' with me.'--Yes, I
would, Mister Astor. I think it'd be fine!--'Y' would? Well, that's
fine! And, Mister Smith, I'll come by for y' in about ten minutes. And
if ye'd like to take a friend along----'"

There now followed, despite the appointment set for so early a moment, a
long and confidential exchange of views on a variety of subjects. When
this was finished, Johnnie rang, in turn, Messrs. Vanderbilt, Carnegie
and Rockefeller, sparing these gentlemen all the time in the world.
(When any one of them did indeed call for him, fulfilling an
appointment, what a gorgeous blue plush hat the millionaire wore! and
what a royally fur-collared coat!)

Now Johnnie put aside the important engagement he had made with Mr.
Astor, and, being careful first to find the right numbers in the book,
got in touch with numerous large concerns, and ordered jewelry,
bicycles, limousines, steam boilers and paper drinking cups with
magnificent lavishness.

He had finished ordering his tenth automobile, which was to be done up
in red velvet to match the faithful Buckle, when there fell upon his
quick ear the sound of a step. In the next instant he let go of the
clothesline, sent the telephone book slipping from the chair at his
feet, and plunged like a swimmer toward that loose ball of gingham under
the sink.

And not a moment too soon; for scarcely had he tossed the tied strings
over his tea-leaf-sprinkled hair, when the door opened, and there, coat
on arm, great chest heaving from his climb, bulgy eyes darting to mark
the condition of the flat, stood--Barber!




CHAPTER V

NEW FRIENDS


IT WAS an awful moment.

During that moment there was dead silence. Johnnie's heart stopped
beating, his ears sang, his throat knotted as if paralyzed, and the skin
on the back of his head crinkled; while in all those uneven thickets of
his tawny, tea-stained hair, small, dreadful winds stirred, and he
seemed to lift--horribly--away from the floor.

Also, a sickish, sinking feeling at the lower end of his breastbone made
him certain that he was about to break in two; and a sudden wobbling of
the knees threatened to bring him down upon them.

Barber closed the hall door at his back--gently, so as not to waken his
father. His eyes were still roving the kitchen appraisingly. It was
plain that the full sink and the littered table were having their effect
upon him; for he had begun that chewing on nothing which betokened a
rising temper.

Johnnie saw, but he was too stunned and scared to think of any way out
of his difficulty. He might have caught up the big cooking spoon and
rapped on that lead pipe--five times in rapid succession, as if he were
trying to clear the spoon of the cereal clinging to its bowl. The five
raps was a signal that he had not used for a long time. It belonged to
that dreadful era to which Cis and he referred as "before the saloons
shut up." Preceding the miracle that had brought the closing of these,
Barber, returning home from his day's work, had needed no excuse for
using the strap or his boot upon either of the children. And once he had
struck helpless old Grandpa--a happening remembered by Cis and Johnnie
with awesome horror, so that they spoke of it as they spoke of the Great
War, or of a murder in the next block.

It had not been possible in those days for Big Tom to overlook the
temptation of drink. To arrive at his own door from any direction he had
to pass saloons. At both of the nearest street crossings northward,
three of the four corners had been occupied by drinking places. There
were two at each of the street crossings to the south. In those now
distant times, the signal, and Mrs. Kukor's prompt answering of it, had
often saved Cis and Johnnie from drunken beatings.

But now the boy sent no signal. Those big-girl's hands were shaking in
spite of all effort to control. His upturned face was a ghastly sallow.
The gray eyes were set.

Barber's survey of the room finished, he stepped across the sagging
telephone line, placed the cargo hook and his lunch pail on the untidy
table, and squared ro
