going to happen to you from one day to the next.
Mr. van Hoeven is a great loss to us too. Bep can't possibly lug such huge amounts of
potatoes all the way here, nor should she have to, so our only choice is to eat fewer
of them. I'll tell you what we have in mind, but it's certainly not going to make life
here any more agreeable. Mother says we'll skip breakfast, eat hot cereal and bread
for lunch and fried potatoes for dinner and, if possible, vegetables or lettuce once or
twice a week. That's all there is. We're going to be hungry, but nothing's worse than
being caught.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
FRIDAY, MAY 26, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
At long, long last, I can sit quietly at my table before the crack in the window frame
and write you everything, everything I want to say.
I feel more miserable than I have in months. Even after the break-in I didn't feel so
utterly broken, inside and out. On the one hand, there's the news about Mr. van
Hoeven, the Jewish question (which is discussed in detail by everyone in the house),
the invasion (which is so long in coming), the awful food, the tension, the miserable atmosphere, my disappointment in Peter. On the other hand, there's Bep's
engagement, the Pentecost reception, the flowers, Mr. Kugler's birthday, cakes and
stories about cabarets, movies and concerts. That gap, that enormous gap, is always
there. One day we're laugh- ing at the comical side of life in hiding, and the next day
(and there are many such days), we're frightened, and the fear, tension and despair
can be read on our faces.
Miep and Mr. Kugler bear the greatest burden for us, and for all those in hiding-Miep
in everything she does and Mr. Kugler through his enormous responsibthty for the
eight of us, which is sometimes so overwhelming that he can hardly speak from the
pent-up tension and strain. Mr. Kleiman and Bep also take very good care of us, but
they're able to put the Annex out of their minds, even if it's only for a few hours or
a few days. They have their own worries, Mr. Kleiman with his health and Bep with
her engagement, which isn't looking very promising lat the moment. But they also have
their outings, their visits with friends, their everyday lives as ordinary people, so that
the tension is sometimes relieved, if only for a short while, while ours never is, never
has been, not once in the two years we've been here. How much longer will this
increasingly oppressive, unbearable weight press I down on us?
The drains are clogged again. We can't run the wa- ter, or if we do, only a trickle;
we can't flush the toilet, so we have to use a toilet brush; and we've been putting our
dirty water into a big earthenware jar. We can man- age for today, but what will
happen if the plumber can't fix it on his own? The Sanitation Department can't come
until Tuesday.
Miep sent us a raisin bread with "Happy Pentecost" written on top. It's almost as if
she were mocking us, since our moods and cares are far from "happy."
We've all become more frightened since the van Hoeven business. Once again you hear
"shh" from all I sides, and we're doing everything more quietly. The police forced the
door there; they could just as easily do that here too! What will we do if we're ever.
. . no, I mustn't write that down. But the question won't let itself be pushed to the
back of my mind today; on the contrary, all the fear I've ever felt is looming before
me in all its horror.
I had to go downstairs alone at eight this evening to use the bathroom. There was no
one down there, since they were all listening to the radio. I wanted to be brave, but it
was hard. I always feel safer upstairs than in that huge, silent house; when I'm alone
with those mysterious muffied sounds from upstairs and the honking of horns in the
street, I have to hurry and remind myself where I am to keep from getting the
shivers.
Miep has been acting much nicer toward us since her talk with Father. But I haven't
told you about that yet. Miep came up one afternoon all flushed and asked Father
straight out if we thought they too were infected with the current anti-Semitism.
Father was stunned and quickly talked her out of the idea, but some of Miep's
suspicion has lingered on. They're doing more errands for us now and showing more
of an interest in our troubles, though we certainly shouldn't bother them with our
woes. Oh, they're such good, noble people!
I've asked myself again and again whether it wouldn't have been better if we hadn't
gone into hiding, if we were dead now and didn't have to go through this misery,
especially so that the others could be spared the burden. But we all shrink from this
thought. We still love life, we haven't yet forgotten the voice of nature, and we keep
hoping, hoping for. . . everything.
Let something happen soon, even an air raid. Nothing can be more crushing than this
anxiety. Let the end come, however cruel; at least then we'll know whether we are to
be the victors or the vanquished.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
WEDNESDAY, MAY 31, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Saturday, Sunday, Monday and Tuesday it was too hot to hold my fountain pen, which
is why I couldn't write to you. Friday the drains were clogged, Saturday they were
fixed. Mrs. Kleiman came for a visit in the afternoon and told us a lot about Jopiej
she and Jacque van Maarsen are in the same hockey club. Sunday Bep dropped by to
make sure there hadn't been a break-in and stayed for breakfast. Monday (a holiday
because of Pentecost), Mr. Gies served as the Annex watchman, and Tuesday we
were finally allowed to open the windows. We've seldom had a Pentecost weekend that
was so beautiful and warm. Or maybe "hot" is a better word. Hot weather is horrible
in the Annex. To give you an idea of the numerous complaints, I'll briefly describe
these sweltering days.
Saturday: "Wonderful, what fantastic weather," we all said in the morning. "If only it
weren't quite so hot," we said in the afternoon, when the windows had to be shut.
Sunday: "The heat's unbearable, the butter's melt- ing, there's not a cool spot
anywhere in the house, the bread's drying out, the milk's going sour, the windows
can't be opened. We poor outcasts are suffocating while everyone else is enjoying
their Pentecost." (According to Mrs. van D.)
Monday: "My feet hurt, I have nothing cool to wear, I can't do the dishes in this
heat!" Grumbling from early in the morning to late at night. It was awful.
I can't stand the heat. I'm glad the wind's come up today, but that the sun's still
shining.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
FRIDAY, JUNE 2, 1944 J
Dear Kitty,
"If you're going to the attic, take an umbrella with you, preferably a large one!" This
is to protect you from "household showers." There's a Dutch proverb: "High and dry,
safe and sound," but it obviously doesn't apply to wartime (guns!) and to people in
hiding (cat box!). Mouschi's gotten into the habit of relieving herself on some
newspapers or between the cracks in the floor boards, so we have good reason to fear
the splatters and, even worse, the stench. The new Moortje in the warehouse has the
same problem. Anyone who's ever had a cat that's not housebroken can imagine the
smells, other than pepper and thyme, that permeate this house.
I also have a brand-new prescription for gunfire jitters: When the shooting gets loud,
proceed to the nearest wooden staircase. Run up and down a few times, making sure
to stumble at least once. What with the scratches and the noise of running and falling,
you won't even be able to hear the shooting, much less worry about it. Yours truly
has put this magic formula to use, with great success!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
MONDAY, JUNE 5, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
New problems in the Annex. A quarrel between Dussel and the Franks over the
division of butter. Capitulation on the part of Dussel. Close friendship between the
latter and Mrs. van Daan, flirtations, kisses and friendly little smiles. Dussel is
beginning to long for female companionship.
The van Daans don't see why we should bake a spice cake for Mr. Kugler's birthday
when we can't have one ourselves. All very petty. Mood upstairs: bad. Mrs. van D.
has a cold. Dussel caught with brewer's yeast tablets, while we've got none.
The Fifth Army has taken Rome. The city neither destroyed nor bombed. Great
propaganda for Hitler.
Very few potatoes and vegetables. One loaf of bread was moldy.
Scharminkeltje (name of new warehouse cat) can't stand pepper. She sleeps in the cat
box and does her business in the wood shavings. Impossible to keep her.
Bad weather. Continuous bombing of Pas de Calais and the west coast of France.
No one buying dollars. Gold even less interesting.
The bottom of our black moneybox is in sight. What are we going to live on next
month?
Yours, Anne M. Frank
TUESDAY, JUNE 6, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
"This is D Day," the BBC announced at twelve.
"This is the day." The invasion has begun!
This morning at eight the British reported heavy bombing of Calais, Boulogne, Le
Havre and Cherbourg, as well as Pas de Calais (as usual). Further, as a precautionary
measure for those in the occupied territories, everyone living within a zone of twenty
miles from the coast was warned to prepare for bombardments. Where possible, the
British will drop pamphlets an hour ahead of time.
According to the German news, British paratroopers have landed on the coast of
France. "British landing craft are engaged in combat with German naval units,"
according to the BBC.
Conclusion reached by the Annex while breakfasting at nine: this is a trial landing, like
the one two years ago in Dieppe.
BBC broadcast in German, Dutch, French and other languages at ten: The invasion has
begun! So this is the "real" invasion. BBC broadcast in German at eleven: speech by
Supreme Commander General Dwight Eisenhower.
BBC broadcast in English: "This is 0 Day." General Eisenhower said to the French
people: "Stiff fighting will come now, but after this the victory. The year 1944 is the
year of complete victory. Good luck!"
BBC broadcast in English at one: 11,000 planes are shuttling back and forth or
standing by to land troops and bomb behind enemy lines; 4,000 landing craft and small
boats are continually arriving in the area between Cher- bourg and Le Havre. English
and American troops are already engaged in heavy combat. Speeches by Gerbrandy,
the Prime Minister of Belgium, King Haakon of Norway, de Gaulle of France, the King
of England and, last but not least, Churchill.
A huge commotion in the Annex! Is this really the beginning of the long-awaited
liberation? The liberation we've all talked so much about, which still seems too good,
too much of a fairy tale ever to come true? Will this year, 1944, bring us victory? We
don't know yet. But where there's hope, there's life. It fills us with fresh courage and
makes us strong again. We'll need to be brave to endure the many fears and hardships
and the suffering yet to come. It's now a matter of remaining calm and steadfast, of
gritting our teeth and keeping a stiff upper lip! France, Russia, Italy, and even
Germany, can cry out in agony, but we don't yet have that right!
Oh, Kitty, the best part about the invasion is that I have the feeling that friends are
on the way. Those terrible Germans have oppressed and threatened us for so long that
the thought of friends and salvation means everything to us! Now it's not just the
Jews, but Holland and all of occupied Europe. Maybe, Margot says, I can even go back
to school in October or September.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
P.S. I'll keep you informed of the latest news!
This morning and last night, dummies made of straw and rubber were dropped from
the air behind German lines, and they exploded the minute they hit the ground. Many
paratroopers, their faces blackened so they couldn't be seen in the dark, landed as
well. The French coast was bombarded with 5,500 tons of bombs during the night, and
then, at six in the morning, the first landing craft came ashore. Today there were
20,000 airplanes in action. The German coastal batteries were destroyed even before
the landing; a small bridgehead has already been formed. Everything's going well,
despite the bad weather. The army and the people are "one will and one hope."
FRIDAY, JUNE 9, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Great news of the invasion! The Allies have taken Bayeux, a village on the coast of
France, and are now fighting for Caen. They're clearly intending to cut off the
peninsula where Cherbourg is located. Every evening the war correspondents report on
the difficulties, the courage and the fighting spirit of the army. To get their stories,
they pull off the most amazing feats. A few of the wounded who are already back in
England also spoke on the radio. Despite the miserable weather, the planes are flying
dthgently back and forth. We heard over the BBC that Churchill wanted to land along
with the troops on D Day, but Eisenhower and the other generals managed to talk him
out of it. Just imagine, so much courage for such an old man he must be at least
seventy!
The excitement here has died down somewhat; still, we're all hoping that the war will
finally be over by the end of the year. It's about time! Mrs. van Daan's constant
griping is unbearable; now that she can no longer drive us crazy with the invasion, she
moans and groans all day about the bad weather. If only we could plunk her down in
the loft in a bucket of cold water!
Everyone in the Annex except Mr. van Daan and Peter has read the Hunaarian
Rhapsody trilogy, a biography of the composer, piano virtuoso and child prodigy Franz
Liszt. It's very interesting, though in my opinion there's a bit too much emphasis on
women; Liszt was not only the greatest and most famous pianist of his time, he was
also the biggest womanizer, even at the age of seventy. He had an affair with
Countess Marie d' Agoult, Princess Carolyne Sayn- Wittgenstein, the dancer Lola
Montez, the pianist Agnes Kingworth, the pianist Sophie Menter, the Circassian
princess Olga Janina, Baroness Olga Meyen- dorff, actress Lilla what's-her-name,
etc., etc., and there's no end to it. Those parts of the book dealing with music and the
other arts are much more interesting. Some of the people mentioned are Schumann,
Clara Wieck, Hector Berlioz, Johannes Brahms, Beethoven, Joachim, Richard Wagner,
Hans von Bulow, Anton Rubinstein, Frederic Chopin, Victor Hugo, Honore de Balzac,
Hiller, Hummel, Czerny, Rossini, Cherubini, Paganini, Mendels- sohn, etc., etc.
Liszt appears to have been a decent man, very generous and modest, though
exceptionally vain. He helped others, put art above all else, was extremely fond of
cognac and women, couldn't bear the sight of tears, was a gentleman, couldn't refuse
anyone a favor, wasn't interested in money and cared about religious freedom and the
world.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
314 ANNE FRANK
TUESDAY, JUNE 13, 1944
Dearest Kit,
Another birthday has gone by, so I'm now fifteen. I received quite a few gifts:
Springer's five-volume art history book, a set of underwear, two belts, a handkerchief,
two jars of yogurt, a jar of jam, two honey cookies (small), a botany book from
Father and Mother, a gold bracelet from Margot, a sticker album from the van Daans,
Biomalt and sweet peas from Dussel, candy from Miep, candy and notebooks from Bep,
and the high point: the book Maria Theresa and three slices of full-cream cheese
from Mr. Kugler. Peter gave me a lovely bouquet of peonies; the poor boy had put a
lot of effort into finding a present, but nothing quite worked out.
The invasion is still going splendidly, in spite of the miserable weather -- pouring
rains, gale winds and high seas.
Yesterday Churchill, Smuts, Eisenhower and Arnold visited the French villages that the
British have captured and liberated. Churchill was on a torpedo boat that shelled the
coast. Uke many men, he doesn't seem to know what fear is -- an enviable trait!
From our position here in Fort Annex, it's difficult to gauge the mood of the Dutch.
No doubt many people are glad the idle (!) British have finally rolled up their sleeves
and gotten down to work. Those who keep claim- ing they don't want to be occupied
by the British don't realize how unfair they're being. Their line of reasoning boils
down to this: England must fight, struggle and sacri- fice its sons to liberate Holland
and the other occupied countries. After that the British shouldn't remain in Hol- land:
they should offer their most abject apologies to all the occupied countries, restore the
Dutch East Indies to its rightful owner and then return, weakened and impoverished, to
England. What a bunch of idiots. And yet, as I've already said, many Dutch people can
be counted among their ranks. What would have become of Holland and its neighbors if
England had signed a peace treaty with Germany, as it's had ample opportunity to do?
Holland would have become German, and that would have been the end of that!
All those Dutch people who still look down on the British, scoff at England and its
government of old fogies, call the English cowards, yet hate the Germans, should be
given a good shaking, the way you'd plump up a pillow. Maybe that would straighten
out their jumbled brains!
Wishes, thoughts, accusations and reproaches are swirling around in my head. I'm not
really as conceited as many people think; I know my various faults and shortcomings
better than anyone else, but there's one difference: I also know that I want to change,
will change and already have changed greatly!
Why is it, I often ask myself, that everyone still thinks I'm so pushy and such a
know-it-all? Am I really so arrogant? Am I the one who's so arrogant, or are they?
It sounds crazy, I know, but I'm not going to cross out that last sentence, because it's
not as crazy as it seems. Mrs. van Daan and Dussel, my two chief accusers, are
known to be totally unintelligent and, not to put too fine a point on it, just plain
"stupid"! Stupid people usually can't bear it when others do something better than they
do; the best examples of this are those two dummies, Mrs. van Daan and Dussel. Mrs.
van D. thinks I'm stupid because I don't suffer so much from this ailment as she does,
she thinks I'm pushy because she's even pushier, she thinks my dresses are too short
because hers are even shorter, and she thinks I'm such a know-it-all because she
talks twice as much as I do about topics she knows nothing about. The same goes for
Dussel. But one of my favorite sayings is "Where there's smoke there's fire," and I
readily admit I'm a know-it-all.
What's so difficult about my personality is that I scold and curse myself much more
than anyone else does; if Mother adds her advice, the pile of sermons becomes so
thick that I despair of ever getting through them. Then I talk back and start
contradicting everyone until the old famthar Anne refrain inevitably crops up again:
"No one understands me!"
This phrase is part of me, and as unlikely as it may seem, there's a kernel of truth in
it. Sometimes I'm so deeply buried under self-reproaches that I long for a word of
comfort to help me dig myself out again. If only I had someone who took my feelings
seriously. Alas, I haven't yet found that person, so the search must go on.
I know you're wondering about Peter, aren't you, Kit? It's true, Peter loves me, not as
a girlfriend, but as a friend. His affection grows day by day, but some mysterious
force is holding us back, and I don't know what it is.
Sometimes I think my terrible longing for him was overexaggerated. But that's not
true, because if I'm unable to go to his room for a day or two, I long for him as
desperately as I ever did. Peter is kind and good, and yet I can't deny that he's
disappointed me in many ways. I especially don't care for his dislike of religion, his
table conversations and various things of that nature. Still, I'm firmly convinced that
we'll stick to our agreement never to quarrel. Peter is peace-loving, tolerant and
extremely easygoing. He lets me say a lot of things to him that he'd never accept
from his mother. He's making a determined effort to remove the blots from his
copybook and keep his affairs in order. Yet why does he hide his innermost self and
never allow me access? Of course, he's much more closed than I am, but I know from
experience (even though I'm constantly being accused of knowing all there is to know
in theory, but not in practice) that in time, even the most uncommunicative types will
long as much, or even more, for someone to confide in.
Peter and I have both spent our contemplative years in the Annex. We often discuss
the future, the past and the present, but as I've already told you, I miss the real
thing, and yet I know it exists!
Is it because I haven't been outdoors for so long that I've become so smitten with
nature? I remember a time when a magnificent blue sky, chirping birds, moonlight and
budding blossoms wouldn't have captivated me. Things have changed since I came
here. One night during the Pentecost holiday, for instance, when it was so hot, I
struggled to keep my eyes open until eleven-thirty so I could get a good look at the
moon, all on my own for once. Alas, my sacrifice was in vain, since there was too
much glare and I couldn't risk opening a window. An- other time, several months ago,
I happened to be upstairs one night when the window was open. I didn't go back down
until it had to be closed again. The dark, rainy evening, the wind, the racing clouds,
had me spellbound; it was the first time in a year and a half that I'd seen the night
face-to-face. After that evening my longing to see it again was even greater than my
fear of burglars, a dark rat-infested house or robberies. I went downstairs all by
myself and looked out the windows in the kitchen and private office. Many people
think nature is beautiful, many people sleep from time to time under the starry sky,
and many people in hospitals and prisons long for the day when they'll be free to
enjoy what nature has to offer. But few are as isolated and cut off as we are from
dle joys of nature, which can be shared by rich and poor alike.
It's not just my imagination -- looking at dle sky, dle clouds, dle moon and dle stars
really does make me feel calm and hopeful. It's much better medicine than valerian or
bromide. Nature makes me feel humble and ready to face every blow with courage!
As luck would have it, I'm only able -- except for a few rare occasions-to view
nature through dusty curtains tacked over dirt-caked windows; it takes dle pleasure
out of looking. Nature is dle one thing for which dlere is no substitute!
One of dle many questions that have often bodlered me is why women have been, and
still are, thought to be so inferior to men. It's easy to say it's unfair, but that's not
enough for me; I'd really like to know the reason for this great injustice!
Men presumably dominated women from the very beginning because of their greater
physical strength; it's men who earn a living, beget children and do as they please. . .
Until recently, women silently went along willi this, which was stupid, since the longer
it's kept up, the more deeply entrenched it becomes. Fortunately, education, work and
progress have opened women's eyes. In many countries they've been granted equal
rights; many people, mainly women, but also men, now realize how wrong it was to
tolerate this state of affairs for so long. Modern women want the right to be
completely independent!
But that's not all. Women should be respected as well! Generally speaking, men are
held in great esteem in all parts ofthe world, so why shouldn't women have their
share? Soldiers and war heroes are honored and commemorated, explorers are granted
immortal fame, martyrs are revered, but how many people look upon women too as
soldiers?
In the book Soldiers on the Home Front I was greatly struck by the fact that in
childbirth alone, women commonly suffer more pain, illness and misery than any war
hero ever does. And what's her reward for enduring all that pain? She gets pushed
aside when she's disfigured by birth, her children soon leave, her beauty is gone.
Women, who struggle and suffer pain to ensure the con- tinuation of the human race,
make much tougher and more courageous soldiers than all those big-mouthed
freedom-fighting heroes put together!
I don't mean to imply that women should stop having children; on the contrary, nature
intended them to, and that's the way it should be. What I condemn are our system of
values and the men who don't acknowledge how great, difficult, but ultimately beautiful
women's share in society is.
I agree completely with Paul de Kruif, the author of this book, when he says that men
must learn that birth is no longer thought of as inevitable and unavoidable in those
parts of the world we consider civthzed. It's easy for men to talk -- they don't and
never will have to bear the woes that women do!
I believe that in the course of the next century the notion that it's a woman's duty to
have children will change and make way for the respect and admiration of all women,
who bear their burdens without complaint or a lot of pompous words!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
FRIDAY, JUNE 16, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
New problems: Mrs. van D. is at her wit's end. She's talking about getting shot, being
thrown in prison, being hanged and suicide. She's jealous that Peter confides in me and
not in her, offended that Dussel doesn't re- spond sufficiently to her flirtations and
afraid her husband's going to squander all the fur-coat money on to- bacco. She
quarrels, curses, cries, feels sorry for herself, laughs and starts allover again.
What on earth can you do with such a silly, sniveling specimen of humanity? Nobody
takes her seriously, she has no strength of character, she complains to one and all,
and you should see how she walks around: von hinten Lyzeum, yon vorne Museum.*
[Acts like a schoolgirl, looks like a frump.] Even worse, Peter's becoming insolent,
Mr. van Daan irritable and Mother cynical. Yes, everyone's in quite a state! There's
only one rule you need to remember: laugh at everything and forget everybody else! It
sounds egotistical, but it's actually the only cure for those suffering from self-pity.
Mr. Kugler's supposed to spend four weeks in Alkmaar on a work detail. He's trying
to get out of it with a doctor's certificate and a letter from Opekta. Mr. Kleiman's
hoping his stomach will be operated on soon. Starting at eleven last night, all private
phones were cut off.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
FRIDAY, JUNE 23, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Nothing special going on here. The British have begun their all-out attack on
Cherbourg. According to Pim and Mr. van Oaan, we're sure to be liberated before
October 10. The Russians are taking part in the cam- paign; yesterday they started
their offensive near Vitebsk, exactly three years to the day that the Germans invaded
Russia.
Bep's spirits have sunk lower than ever. We're nearly out of potatoes; from now on,
we're going to count them out for each person, then everyone can do what they want
with them. Starting Monday, Miep's taking a week of vacation. Mr. Kleiman's doctors
haven't found anything on the X rays. He's torn between having an operation and
letting matters take their course.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
TUESDAY, JUNE 27, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
The mood has changed, everything's going enormously well. Cherbourg, Vitebsk and
Zhlobin fell today. They're sure to have captured lots of men and equipment. Five
German generals were killed near Cherbourg and two taken captive. Now that they've
got a harbor, the British can bring whatever they want on shore. The whole Cotentin
Peninsula has been captured just three weeks after the invasion! What a feat!
In the three weeks since D Day there hasn't been a day without rain and storms,
neither here nor in France, but this bad luck hasn't kept the British and the Americans
from displaying their might. And how! Of course, the Germans have launched their
wonder weapon, but a little firecracker like that won't hardly make a dent, except
maybe minor damage in England and screaming headlines in the Kraut newspapers.
Anyway, when they realize in "Krautland" that the Bolsheviks really are getting closer,
they'll be shaking in their boots.
All German women who aren't working for the military are being evacuated, together
with their children, from the coastal regions to the provinces of Groningen, Friesland
and Gelderland. Mussert* [* The leader of the Dutch National Socialist (Nazi) Party]
has announced that if the invasion reaches Holland, he'll enlist. Is that fat pig planning
to fight? He could have done that in Russia long before now. Finland turned down a
peace offer some time ago, and now the negotiations have been broken off again.
Those numbskulls, they'll be sorry!
How far do you think we'll be on July 27?
Yours, Anne M. Frank
FRIDAY, JUNE 30, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Bad weather from one at a stretch to the thirty June* [Anne's English.] Don't I say
that well? Oh yes, I already know a little English; just to prove it I'm reading An
Ideal Husband with the help of a dictionary! War's going wonderfully: Bobruysk,
Mogilev and Orsha have fallen, lots of prisoners.
Everything's all right here. Spirits are improving, our superoptimists are triumphant,
the van Daans are doing disappearing acts with the sugar, Bep' s changed her hair, and
Miep has a week off. That's the latest news!
I've been having really ghastly root-canal work done on one of my front teeth. It's
been terribly painful. It was so bad Dussel thought I was going to faint, and I nearly
did. Mrs. van D. promptly got a toothache as well!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
P.S. We've heard from Basel that Bernd* [Cousin Bernhard (Buddy) Elias]. played the
part of the innkeeper in Minna von Barnhelm. He has "artistic leanings," says Mother.
THURSDAY, JULY 6, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
My blood runs cold when Peter talks about becoming a criminal or a speculator; of
course, he's joking, but I still have the feeling he's afraid of his own weakness.
Margot and Peter are always saying to me, "If I had your spunk and your strength, if
I had your drive and unflagging energy, could. . .
Is it really such an admirable trait not to let myself be influenced by others? Am I
right in following my own conscience?
To be honest, I can't imagine how anyone could say "I'm weak" and then stay that
way. If you know that about yourself, why not fight it, why not develop your
character? Their answer has always been: "Because it's much easier not to!" This
reply leaves me feeling rather discouraged. Easy? Does that mean a life of deceit and
laziness is easy too? Oh no, that can't be true. It can't be true that people are so
readily tempted by ease. . . and money. I've given a lot of thought to what my answer
should be, to how I should get Peter to believe in himself and, most of all, to change
himself for the better. I don't know whether I'm on the right track.
I've often imagined how nice it would be if someone were to confide everything to
me. But now that it's reached that point, I realize how difficult it is to put yourself in
someope else's shoes and find the right answer. Especially since "easy" and "money"
are new and com- pletely alien concepts to me.
Peter's beginning to lean on me and I don't want that, not under any circumstances.
It's hard enough standing on your own two feet, but when you also have to remain
true to your character and soul, it's harder still.
I've been drifting around at sea, have spent days searching for an effective antidote to
that terrible word "easy." How can I make it clear to him that, while it may seem
easy and wonderful, it will drag him down to the depths, to a place where he'll no
longer find friends, support or beauty, so far down that he may never rise to the
surface again?
We're all alive, but we don't know why or what for; we're all searching for happiness;
we're all leading lives that are different and yet the same. We three have been raised
in good famthes, we have the opportunity to get an education and make something of
ourselves. We have many reasons to hope for great happiness, but. . . we have to
earn it. And that's something you can't achieve by taking the easy way out. Earning
happiness means doing good and working, not speculating and being lazy. Laziness may
look inviting, but only work gives you true satisfaction.
I can't understand people who don't like to work, but that isn't Peter's problem either.
He just doesn't have a goal, plus he thinks he's too stupid and inferior to ever achieve
anything. Poor boy, he's never known how it feels to make someone else happy, and
I'm afraid I can't teach him. He isn't religious, scoffs at Jesus Christ and takes the
Lord's name in vain, and though I'm not Orthodox either, it hurts me every time to
see him so lonely, so scornful, so wretched.
People who are religious should be glad, since not everyone is blessed with the ability
to believe in a higher order. You don't even have to live in fear of eternal punishment;
the concepts of purgatory, heaven and hell are difficult for many people to accept, yet
religion itself, any religion, keeps a person on the right path. Not the fear of God, but
upholding your own sense of honor and obeying your own conscience. How noble and
good everyone could be if, at the end of each day, they were to review their own
behavior and weigh up the rights and wrongs. They would automatically try to do
better at the start of each new day and, after a while, would certainly accomplish a
great deal. Everyone is welcome to this prescription; it costs nothing and is definitely
useful. Those who don't know will have to find out by experience that "a quiet
conscience gives you strength!"
Yours, Anne M. Frank
SATURDAY, JULY 8, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Mr. Broks was in Beverwijk and managed to get hold of strawberries at the produce
auction. They arrived here dusty and full of sand, but in large quantities. No less than
twenty-four crates for the office and us. That very same evening we canned the first
six jars and made eight jars of jam. The next morning Miep started making jam for
the office.
At twelve-thirty the outside door was locked, crates were lugged into the kitchen,
with Peter, Father and Mr. van Daan stumbling up the stairs. Anne got hot water from
the water heater, Margot"",went for a bucket, all hands on deck! With a funny feeling
in my stomach, I entered the overcrowded office kitchen. Miep, Bep, Mr. Kleiman, Jan,
Father, Peter: the Annex contingent and the Supply Corps all mixed up together, and
that in the middle of the day! Curtains and windows open, loud voices, banging doors
-- I was trembling with excitement. I kept thinking, "Are we really in hiding?" This
must be how it feels when you can finally go out into the world again. The pan was
full, so I dashed upstairs, where the rest of the family was hulling strawberries around
the kitchen table. At least that's what they were supposed to be doing, but more was
going into their mouths than into the buckets. They were bound to need another
bucket soon. Peter went back downstairs, but then the doorbell rang twice. Leaving the
bucket where it was, Peter raced upstairs and shut the bookcase behind him. We sat
kicking our heels impatiently; the strawberries were waiting to be rinsed, but we stuck
to the house rule: "No running water when strangers are downstairs -- they might
hear the drains."
Jan came up at one to tell us it had been the mail- man. Peter hurried downstairs
again. Ding-dong. . . the doorbell, about-face. I listened to hear if anyone was
coming, standing first at the bookcase, then at the top of the stairs. Finally Peter and
I leaned over the banister, straining our ears like a couple of burglars to hear the
sounds from downstairs. No unfamthar voices. Peter tip- toed halfway down the stairs
and called out, "Bep!"
Once more: "Bep!" His voice was drowned out by the racket in the kitchen. So he ran
down to the kitchen while I nervously kept watch from above. "Go upstairs at once,
Peter, the accountant's here, you've got to leave!" It was Mr. Kugler's voice. Sighing,
Peter came upstairs and closed the bookcase.
Mr. Kugler finally came up at one-thirty. "My gosh, the whole world's turned to
strawberries. I had strawber- ries for breakfast, Jan's having diem for lunch,
Kleiman's eating them as a snack, Miep's bothng them, Bep's hulling them, and I can
smell them everywhere I go. I come upstairs to get away from all that red and what
do I see? People washing strawberries!"
The rest of the strawberries were canned. That evening: two jars came unsealed.
Father quickly turned them into jam. The next morning: two more lids popped up; and
that afternoon: four lids. Mr. van Daan hadn't gotten the jars hot enough when he was
sterthzing them, so Father ended up making jam every evening. We ate hot cereal with
strawberries, buttermilk with strawberries, bread with strawberries, strawberries for
dessert, straw- berries with sugar, strawberries with sand. For two days there was
nothing but strawberries, strawberries, strawberries, and then our supply was either
exhausted or in jars, safely under lock and key.
"Hey, Anne," Margot called out one day, "Mrs. van Hoeven has let us have some peas,
twenty pounds!"
"That's nice of her," I replied. And it certainly was, but it's so much work. . . ugh!
"On Saturday, you've aJI got to shell peas," Mother announced at the table.
And sure enough, this morning after breakfast our biggest enamel pan appeared on the
table, filled to the brim with peas. If you think shelling peas is boring work, you ought
to try removing the inner linings. I don't think many people realize that once you've
pulled out the linings, the pods are soft, delicious and rich in vitamins. But an even
greater advantage is that you get nearly three times as much as when you eat just the
peas.
Stripping pods is a precise and meticulous job that might be suited to pedantic dentists
or finicky spice experts, but it's a horror for an impatient teenager like me. We
started work at nine-thirty; I sat down at ten-thirty, got Up again at eleven, sat
down again at eleven-thirty. My ears were humming with the following refrain: snap
the end, strip the pod, pull the string, pod in the pan, snap the end, strip the pod, pull
the string, pod in the pan, etc., etc. My eyes were swimming: green, green, worm,
string, rotten pod, green, green. To fight the boredom and have something to do, I
chattered all morn- ing, saying whatever came into my head and making everyone
laugh. The monotony was killing me. Every string I pulled made me more certain that
I never, ever, want to be just a housewife!
At twelve we finally ate breakfast, but from twelve-thirty to one-fifteen we had to
strip pods again. When I stopped, I felt a bit seasick, and so did the others. I napped
until four, still in a daze because of those wretched peas.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
SATURDAY, JULY 15,1944
Dearest Kitty,
We've received a book from the library with the challenging title What Do You Think
of the Modern Young Girl? I'd like to discuss this subject today.
The writer criticizes "today's youth" from head to toe, though without dismissing them
all as "hopeless cases." On the contrary, she believes they have it within their power
to build a bigger, better and more beautiful world, but that they occupy themselves
with superficial things, without giving a thought to true beauty. In some passages I
had the strong feeling that the writer was directing her disapproval at me, which is
why I finally want to bare my soul to you and defend myself against this attack.
I have one outstanding character trait that must be obvious to anyone who's known me
for any length of time: I have a great deal of self-knowledge. In everything I do, I
can watch myself as if I were a stranger. I can stand c across from the everyday
Anne and, without being biased or making excuses, watch what she's doing, both the
good and the bad. This self-awareness never leaves me, and every time I open my
mouth, I think, "You should have said that differently" or "That's fine the way it is." I
condemn myself in so many ways that I'm beginning to realize the truth of Father's
adage: "Every child has to raise itself." Parents can only advise their children or point
them in the right direction. Ultimately, people shape their own characters. In addition,
I face life with an extraordinary amount of courage. I feel so strong and capable of
bearing burdens, so young and free! When I first realized this, I was glad, because it
means I can more easily withstand the blows life has in store.
But I've talked about these things so often. Now I'd like to turn to the chapter "Father
and Mother Don't Understand Me." My parents have always spoiled me rotten, treated
me kindly, defended me against the van Daans and done all that parents can. And yet
for the longest time I've felt extremely lonely, left out, neglected and misunderstood.
Father did everything he could to curb my rebellious spirit, but it was no use. I've
cured myself by holding my behavior up to the light and looking at what I was doing
wrong.
Why didn't Father support me in my struggle? Why did he fall short when he tried to
offer me a helping hand? The answer is: he used the wrong methods. He always
talked to me as if I were a child going through a difficult phase. It sounds crazy,
since Father's the only one who's given me a sense of confidence and made me feel
as if I'm a sensible person. But he overlooked one thing: he failed to see that this
struggle to triumph over my difficulties was more important to me than anything else.
I didn't want to hear about "typical adolescent problems," or "other girls," or "you'll
grow out of it." I didn't want to be treated the same as all-the-other-girls, but as
Anne-in-her-own-right, and rim didn't understand that. Besides, I can't confide in
anyone unless they tell me a lot about themselves, and because I know very little
about him, I can't get on a more intimate footing. rim always acts like the elderly
father who once had the same fleeting im- pulses, but who can no longer relate to
me as a friend, no matter how hard he tries. As a result, I've never shared my
outlook on life or my long-pondered theories with anyone but my diary and, once in a
while, Margot. I've hid any- thing having to do with me from Father, never shared my
ideals with him, deliberately alienated myself from him.
I couldn't have done it any other way. I've let myself be guided entirely by my
feelings. It was egotistical, but I've done what was best for my own peace of mind. I
would lose that, plus the self-confidence I've worked so hard to achieve, if I were to
be subjected to criticism halfway through the job. It may sound hard-hearted, but I
can't take criticism from rim either, because not only do I never share my innermost
thoughts with him, but I've pushed him even further away by being irritable.
This is a point I think about quite often: why is it that rim annoys me so much
sometimes? I can hardly bear to have him tutor me, and his affection seems forced. I
want to be left alone, and I'd rather he ignored me for a while until I'm more sure of
myself when I'm talking to him! I'm still torn with guilt about the mean letter I wrote
him when I was so upset. Oh, it's hard to be strong and brave in every way!
. . .
Still, this hasn't been my greatest disappointment. No, I think about Peter much more
than I do Father. I know very well that he was my conquest, and not the other way
around. I created an image of him in my mind, pictured him as a quiet, sweet,
sensitive boy badly in need of friendship and love! I needed to pour out my heart to a
living person. I wanted a friend who would help me find my way again. I accomplished
what I set out to do and drew him, slowly but surely, toward me. When I finally got
him to be my friend, it automatically developed into an intimacy that, when I think
about it now, seems outrageous. We talked about the most private things, but we
haven't yet touched upon the things closest to my heart. I still can't make head or tail
of Peter. Is he superficial, or is it shyness that holds him back, even with me? But
putting all that aside, I made one mistake: I used intimacy to get closer to him, and in
doing so, I ruled out other forms of friendship. He longs to be loved, and I can see
he's beginning to like me more with each passing day. Our time together leaves him
feeling satisfied, but just makes me want to start all over again. I never broach the
subjects I long to bring out into the open. I forced Peter, more than he realizes, to
get close to me, and now he's holding on for dear life. I honestly don't see any
effective way of shaking him off and getting him back on his own two feet. I soon
realized he could never be a kindred spirit, but still tried to help him break out of his
narrow world and expand his youthful horizons.
"Deep down, the young are lonelier than the old." I read this in a book somewhere and
it's stuck in my mind. As far as I can tell, it's true.
So if you're wondering whether it's harder for the adults here than for the children,
the answer is no, it's certainly not. Older people have an opinion about everything and
are sure of themselves and their actions. It's twice as hard for us young people to
hold on to our opinions at a time when ideals are being shattered and destroyed, when
the worst side of human nature predominates, when everyone has come to doubt truth,
justice and God.
Anyone who claims that the older folks have a more difficult time in the Annex
doesn't realize that the problems have a far greater impact on us. We're much too
young to deal with these problems, but they keep thrusting themselves on us until,
finally, we're forced to think up a solution, though most of the time our solutions
crumble when faced with the facts. It's difficult in times like these: ideals, dreams and
cherished hopes rise within us, only to be crushed by grim reality. It's a wonder I
haven't abandoned all my ideals, they seem so absurd and impractical. Yet I cling to
them because I still believe, in spite of everything, that people are truly good at heart.
It's utterly impossible for me to build my life on a foundation of chaos, suffering and
death. I see the world being slowly transformed into a wilderness, I hear the
approaching thunder that, one day, will destroy us too, I feel the suffering of millions.
And yet, when I look up at the sky, I somehow feel that everything will change for
the better, that this cruelty too shall end, that peace and tranquthty will return once
more. In the meantime, I must hold on to my ideals. Perhaps the day will come when
I'll be able to realize them!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
FRIDAY, JULY 21, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
I'm finally getting optimistic. Now, at last, things are going well! They really are!
Great news! An assassination attempt has been made on Hitler's life, and for once not
by Jewish Communists or English capitalists, but by a German general who's not only
a count, but young as well. The Fuhrer owes his life to "Divine Providence": he
escaped, unfortunately, with only a few minor burns and scratches. A number of the
officers and generals who were nearby were killed or wounded. The head of the
conspiracy has been shot.
This is the best proof we've had so far that many officers and generals are fed up
with the war and would like to see Hitler sink into a bottomless pit, so they can
establish a mthtary dictatorship, make peace with the Allies, rearm themselves and,
after a few decades, start a new war. Perhaps Providence is deliberately biding its
time getting rid of Hider, since it's much easier, and cheaper, for the Allies to let the
impeccable Germans kill each other off. It's less work for the Russians and the British,
and it allows them to start rebuilding their own cities all that much sooner. But we
haven't reached that point yet, and I'd hate to anticipate the glorious event. Still,
you've probably noticed that I'm telling the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the
truth. For once, I'm not rattling on about high ideals.
Furthermore, Hitler has been so kind as to announce to his loyal, devoted people that
as of today all mthtary personnel are under orders of the Gestapo, and that any
soldier who knows that one of his superiors was involved in this cowardly attempt on
the Fuhrer's life may shoot him on sight!
A fine kettle of fish that will be. Little Johnny's feet are sore after a long march and
his commanding officer bawls him out. Johnny grabs his rifle, shouts, "You, you tried
to kill the Fuhrer. Take that!" One shot, and the snooty officer who dared to
reprimand him passes into eternal life (or is it eternal death?). Eventually, every time
an officer sees a soldier or gives an order, he'll be practically wetting his pants,
because the soldiers have more say-so than he does.
Were you able to follow that, or have I been skipping from one subject to another
again? I can't help it, the prospect of going back to school in October is making me
too happy to be logical! Oh dear, didn't I just get through telling you I didn't want to
anticipate events? Forgive me, Kitty, they don't call me a bundle of contradictions for
nothing!
Yours, Anne M. Frank
TUESDAY, AUGUST 1, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
"A bundle of contradictions" was the end of my previous letter and is the beginning of
this one. Can you please tell me exactly what "a bundle of contradictions" is? What
does "contradiction" mean? Like so many words, it can be interpreted in two ways: a
contradiction imposed from without and one imposed from within. The former means
not accepting other people's opinions, always knowing best, having the last word; in
short, all those unpleasant traits for which I'm known. The latter, for which I'm not
known, is my own secret.
As I've told you many times, I'm split in two. One side contains my exuberant
cheerfulness, my flippancy, my joy in life and, above all, my abthty to appreciate the
lighter side of things. By that I mean not finding anything wrong with flirtations, a
kiss, an embrace, an off-color joke. This side of me is usually lying in wait to
ambush the other one, which is much purer, deeper and finer. No one knows Anne's
better side, and that's why most people can't stand me. Oh, I can be an amusing clown
for an afternoon, but after that everyone's had enough of me to last a month. Actually,
I'm what a romantic movie is to a profound thinker -- a mere diversion, a comic
interlude, something that is soon forgotten: not bad, but not particularly good either. I
hate haVing to tell you this, but why shouldn't I admit it when I know it's true? My
lighter, more superficial side will always steal a march on the deeper side and
therefore always win. You can't imagine how often I've tried to p:ush away this Anne,
which is only half of what is known as Anne-to beat her down, hide her. But it
doesn't work, and I know why.
I'm afraid that people who know me as I usually am will discover I have another side,
a better and finer side. I'm afraid they'll mock me, think I'm ridiculous and sentimental
and not take me seriously. I'm used to not being taken seriously, but only the
"lighthearted" Anne is used to it and can put up with it; the "deeper" Anne is too
weak. If I force the good Anne into the spotlight for even fifteen minutes, she shuts
up like a clam the moment she's called upon to speak, and lets Anne number one do
the talking. Before I realize it, she's disappeared.
So the nice Anne is never seen in company. She's never made a single appearance,
though she almost always takes the stage when I'm alone. I know exactly how I'd like
to be, how I am . . . on the inside. But unfortunately I'm only like that with myself.
And perhaps that's why-no, I'm sure that's the reason why -- I think of myself as
happy on the inside and other people think I'm happy on the outside. I'm guided by
the pure Anne within, but on the outside I'm nothing but a frolicsome little goat
tugging at its tether.
As I've told you, what I say is not what I feel, which is why I have a reputation for
being boy-crazy as well as a flirt, a smart aleck and a reader of romances. The
happy-go-lucky Anne laughs, gives a flippant reply, shrugs her shoulders and
pretends she doesn't give a darn. The quiet Anne reacts in just the opposite way. If
I'm being completely honest, I'll have to admit that it does matter to me, that I'm
trying very hard to change myself, but that I I'm always up against a more powerful
enemy.
A voice within me is sobbing, "You see, that's what's become of you. You're
surrounded by negative opinions, dismayed looks and mocking faces, people, who
dislike you, and all because you don't listen to the ; advice of your own better half."
Believe me, I'd like ;' to listen, but it doesn't work, because if I'm quiet and serious,
everyone thinks I'm putting on a new act and I have to save myself with a joke, and
then I'm not even talking about my own family, who assume I must be sick, stuff me
with aspirins and sedatives, feel my neck and forehead to see if I have a temperature,
ask about my bowel movements and berate me for being in a bad mood, until I just
can't keep it up anymore, because jj when everybody starts hovering over me, I get
cross, then sad, and finally end up turning my heart inside g out, the bad part on the
outside and the good part on the inside, and keep trying to find a way to become
what I'd like to be and what I could be if . . . if only there were no other people in
the world.
Yours, Anne M. Frank
-----------------------
ANNE'S DIARY ENDS HERE.
-----------------------
AFTERWORD
On the morning of August 4, 1944, sometime between ten and ten-thirty, a car pulled
up at 263 Prinsengracht. Several figures emerged: an SS sergeant, Karl Josef
Silberbauer, in full uniform, and at least three Dutch members of the Security Police,
armed but in civilian clothes. Someone must have tipped them off.
They arrested the eight people hiding in the Annex, as well as two of their helpers,
Victor Kugler and Johannes Kleiman -- though not Miep Gies and Elisabeth (Bep)
Voskuijl-and took all the valuables and cash they could find in the Annex.
After the arrest, Kugler and Kleiman were taken to a prison in Amsterdam. On
September 11, 1944, they were transferred, without benefit of a trial, to a camp in
Amersfoort (Holland). Kleiman, because of his poor health, was released on September
18, 1944. He remained in Amsterdam until his death in 1959.
Kugler managed to escape his imprisonment on March 28, 1945, when he and his
fellow prisoners were being sent to Germany as forced laborers. He immigrated to
Canada in 1955 and died in Toronto in 1989.
Elisabeth (Bep) Voskuijl Wijk died in Amsterdam in 1983.
Miep Santrouschitz Gies is still living in Amsterdam; her husband Jan died in 1993.
Upon their arrest, the eight residents of the Annex were first brought to a prison in
Amsterdam and then transferred to Westerbork, the transit camp for Jews in the north
of Holland. They were deported on September 3, 1944, in the last transport to leave
Westerbork, and arrived three days later in Auschwitz (Poland).
Hermann van Pels (van Daan) was, according to the testimony of Otto Frank, gassed
to death in Auschwitz in October or November 1944, shortly before the gas chambers
were dismantled.
Auguste van Pels (Petronella van Daan) was transported from Auschwitz to
Bergen-Belsen, from there to Buchenwald, then to Theresienstadt on April 9, 1945,
and apparently to another concentration camp after that. It is certain that she did not
survive, though the date of her death is unknown.
Peter van Pels (van Daan) was forced to take part in the January 16, 1945 "death
march" from Auschwitz to Mauthausen (Austria), where he died on May 5, 1945, three
days before the camp was liberated.
Fritz Pfeffer (Albert Dussel) died on December 20, 1944, in the Neuengamme
concentration camp, where he had been transferred from either Buchenwald or
Sachsenhausen.
Edith Frank died in Auschwitz-Birkenau on January 6, 1945, from hunger and
exhaustion.
Margot and Anne Frank were transported from Auschwitz at the end of October and
brought to Bergen Belsen, a concentration camp near Hannover (Germany). The typhus
epidemic that broke out in the winter of 1944-1945, as a result of the horrendous
hygenic conditions, killed thousands of prisoners, including Margot and, a few days
later, Anne. She must have died in late February or early March. The bodies of both
girls were probably dumped in Bergen-Belsen's mass graves. The camp was liberated
by British troops on April 12, 1945.
Otto Frank was the only one of the eight to survive the concentration camps. After
Auschwitz was liberated by Russian troops, he was repatriated to Amsterdam by way
of Odessa and Marseille. He arrived in Amsterdam on June 3, 1945, and stayed there
until 1953, when he moved to Basel (Switzerland), where his sister and her family,
and later his brother, lived. He married Elfriede Markovits Geiringer, originally from
Vienna, who had survived Auschwitz and lost a husband and son in Mauthausen. Until
his death on August 19, 1980, Otto Frank continued to live in Birsfelden, outside
Basel, where he devoted himself to sharing the message of his daughter's diary with
people all over the world.
The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Lonesome Trail, by John Gneisenau Neihardt


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: The Lonesome Trail
       The Alien; The Look in the Face; Feather for Feather; The Scars; The Fading of Shadow Flower; The Art of Hate; The Singer of the Ache; The White Wakunda; The Triumph of Seha; The End of the Dream; The Revolt of a Sheep; The Mark of Shame; The Beating of the War Drums; Dreams Are Wiser Than Men; The Smile of God; The Heart of a Woman; Mignon; A Political Coup at Little Omaha; The Last Thunder Song; The Nemesis of the Deuces


Author: John Gneisenau Neihardt



Release Date: November 16, 2015  [eBook #50464]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LONESOME TRAIL***


E-text prepared by Giovanni Fini, Shaun Pinder, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made
available by Internet Archive (https://archive.org)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustration.
      See 50464-h.htm or 50464-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/50464/50464-h/50464-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/50464/50464-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/lonesometrail00neihrich





THE LONESOME TRAIL


[Illustration: _Drawn by F. E. Schoonover_
THE RACE WITH THE FIRE
_See The Nemesis of the Deuces, page 300_]


THE LONESOME TRAIL

by

JOHN G. NEIHARDT

   _In the fell clutch of circumstance
   I have not winced nor cried aloud._







New York: John Lane Company, MCMVII
London: John Lane, The Bodley Head

Copyright, 1907,
by
John G. Neihardt


                                  TO

                            VOLNEY STREAMER

                      _Friend of my Yester-age_




_The stories in this volume have appeared in the following magazines:
Munseys, The American Magazine, The Smart Set, The Scrap Book,
The All-Story, Watsons, Overland Monthly. The author gratefully
acknowledges permission to republish._




  CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                                         PAGE

      I. THE ALIEN                                  11

     II. THE LOOK IN THE FACE                       31

    III. FEATHER FOR FEATHER                        45

     IV. THE SCARS                                  58

      V. THE FADING OF SHADOW FLOWER                75

     VI. THE ART OF HATE                            93

    VII. THE SINGER OF THE ACHE                    110

   VIII. THE WHITE WAKUNDA                         123

     IX. THE TRIUMPH OF SEHA                       143

      X. THE END OF THE DREAM                      151

     XI. THE REVOLT OF A SHEEP                     168

    XII. THE MARK OF SHAME                         182

   XIII. THE BEATING OF THE WAR DRUMS              194

    XIV. DREAMS ARE WISER THAN MEN                 204

     XV. THE SMILE OF GOD                          219

    XVI. THE HEART OF A WOMAN                      229

   XVII. MIGNON                                    239

  XVIII. A POLITICAL COUP AT LITTLE OMAHA          255

    XIX. THE LAST THUNDER SONG                     276

     XX. THE NEMESIS OF THE DEUCES                 288




_THE OLD CRY_


  _O Mourner in the silence of the hills,
  O Thing of ancient griefs, art thou a wolf?
  I heard a cry that shook mewas it thine?_

  _Low in the mystic purple of the west
  The weird moon hangs, a tarnished silver slug:
  Vast, vast the hollow empty night curves down,
  Stabbed with the glass-like glinting of the stars,
  And, save when that wild cry grows up anon,
  No sound but this dull murmur of the hush
  The winter hush._

                _Hark! once again thy cry!_
  _Thy strange, sharp, ice-like, tenuous complaint,
  As though the spirit of this frozen waste
  Pinched with the cruel frost yearned summerward!_

  _I know thou art a wolf that criest so:
  Though hidden in the shadow, I can see
  Thy four feet huddled in the numbing frost,
  Thy snout, breath-whitened, pointing to the sky:
  Poor pariah of the plains, I know tis thou._

  _And yetand yetI heard a kinsman shout!
  Down through the intricate centuries it came,
  A far-blown cry! From old-world graves it grew,
  Up through the tumbled walls of ancient realms,
  Up through the lizard-haunted heaps of stone,
  Up through the choking ashes of old fanes,
  The pitiful debris where Grandeur dwelt,
  Out of the old-world wilderness it grew
  The cry I know! And I have heard my Kin!_




I

THE ALIEN


THROUGH the quiet night, crystalline with the pervading spirit of the
frost, under prairie skies of mystic purple pierced with the glass-like
glinting of the stars, fled Antoine.

Huge and hollow-sounding with the clatter of the pintos hoofs hung the
night above and aboutlonesome, empty, bitter as the soul of him who
fled.

A weary age of flight since sunset; and now the midnight saw the
thin-limbed, long-haired pony slowly losing his nerve, tottering,
rasping in the throat. With pitiless spike-spurred heels the rider
hurled the beast into the empty night.

Gwan! you blasted cayuse! you overgrown wolf-dog! you pot-bellied
shonga! Keep up that tune; Im goin somewheres. Whatd I steal you
fer? Pleasure? He, he, he, ho, ho, ho! I reckon; pleasure for the
half-breed! Gwan!

Suddenly rounding a bank of sand, the pinto sighted the broad,
ice-bound river, an elysian stream of glinting silver under the stars.
Sniffing and crouching upon its haunches at the sudden glow that
dwindled a gleaming thread into the further dusk, the jaded beast
received a series of vicious jabs from the spike-spurred heels. It
groaned and lunged forward again, taking with uncertain feet the
glaring path ahead, and awakening dull, snarling thunder in the under
regions of the ice. Slipping, struggling, doing its brute best to
overcome fatigue and the uncertainty of its path, the pinto covered the
ice.

Doin a war dance, eh? growled the man with bitter mirth, and
gouging the foaming bloody flanks of the animal. Gwan! Set up that
tune; I want fast music, cause Im goin somewheresdont know
wheresomewheres out there in the shadders! Come here, will you? Take
that and that and _that_! Now will you kick the scenry backards? By
the!

The brutal cries of the man were cut short as he shot far over the
pommel, lunging headlong over the pintos head, and striking with head
and shoulders upon the glare ice. When he stopped sliding he lay very
still for a few moments. Then he groaned, sat up, and found that the
bluffs and the river and the stars and the universe in general were
whirling giddily, with himself for the dizzy centre.

With uncertain arms he reached out, endeavouring to check the sickening
motion of things with the sheer force of his powerful hands. He was
thrown down like a weakling wrestling with a giant. He lay still,
cursing in a whisper, trying to steady the universe, until the motion
passed, leaving in his nerves the sickening sensation incident to the
sudden ending of a rapid flight.

With great care Antoine raised himself upon his elbows and gazed about
with an imbecile leer. Then he began to remember; remembered that
he was hunted; that he was an outcast, a man of no race; remembered
dimly, and with a malignant grin, a portion of a long series of crimes;
remembered that the last was horse-stealing and that some of the
others concerned blood. And as he remembered, he felt with horrible
distinctness the lariat tightening about his neckthe lariat that the
men of Cabannes trading post were bringing on fleet horses, nearer,
nearer, nearer through the silent night.

Antoine shuddered and got to his feet, looming huge against the
star-sprent surface of the ice, as he turned a face of bestial
malevolence down trail and listened for the beat of hoofs. There was
only the dim, hollow murmur that dwells at the heart of silence.

Got a long start, he observed, with the chuckle of a man whom
desperation has made careless. Hel-_lo_!

A pale, semicircular glow, like the flare of a burning straw stack
a half days journey over the hills, had grown up at the horizon of
the east; and as the man stared, still in a maze from his recent
fall, the moon heaved a tarnished silver arc above the mystic rim of
sky, flooding with new light the river and the bluffs. The man stood
illumineda big brute of a man, heavy-limbed, massive-shouldered, with
the slouching stoop and the alert air of an habitual skulker. He moved
uneasily, as though he had suddenly become visible to some lurking foe.
He glanced nervously about him, fumbled at the butt of a six-shooter
at his belt, then catching sight of the blotch of huddled dusk that was
the fallen pinto, the meaning of the situation flashed upon him.

That cussed cayuse! Gone and done hisself like as not! Damn me! the
whole creations agin me!

He made for the pony, snarling viciously as though its exhausted,
lacerated self were the visible body of the inimical universe. He
grasped the reins and jerked them violently. The brute only groaned and
let its weary head fall heavily upon the ice.

_Get up!_

Antoine began kicking the pony in the ribs, bringing forth great hollow
bellowings of pain.

O, you wont get up, eh? Agin me too, eh? Take that, and that and
_that_! I wished you was everybody in the whole world and hell to
oncet, Id make you beller now I got you down! Take _that_!

The man with a roar of anger fell upon the pony, snarling, striking,
kicking, but the pony only groaned. Its limbs could no longer support
its body. When Antoine had exhausted his rage, he got up, gave the pony
a parting kick on the nose, and started off at a dogtrot across the
glinting ice towards the bluffs beyond.

Ever and anon he stopped and whirled about with hand at ear. He heard
only the sullen murmur of the silence, broken occasionally by the whine
and pop of the ice and the plaintive, bitter wail of the coyotes
somewhere in the hills, like the heartbroken cry of the lonesome
prairie, yearning for the summer.

O, I wouldnt howl if I was you, muttered the man to the coyotes;
I wished I was a coyote or a grey wolf, knowin what I do. Id be a
man-killer and a cattle-killer, I would. And then Id have people of
my own. Wouldnt be no cur of a half-breed runnin from his kind. O, I
wouldnt howl if I was you!

He proceeded at a swinging trot across the half mile of ice and halted
under the bluffs. He listened intently. A far sound had grown up in the
hollow nightvague, but unmistakable. It was the clatter of hoofs far
away, but clear in faintness, for the cold snap had made the prairie
one vast sounding-board. A light snow had fallen the night before, and
the trail of the refugee was traced in the moonlight, distinct as a
wagon track.

Antoine felt the pitiless pinch of the approaching lariat as he
listened. Then his accustomed bitter weariness of life came upon the
pariah.

Whats the use of me runnin? What am I runnin to? Nothinonly more
of the same thing Im runnin from; lonesomeness and hunger and the
like of that. Gettin awake stiff and cold and half starved and cussin
the daylight cause its agin me like everything else, and gives me
away. Sneakin around in the brush till dark, eatin when I can like
a damned wolf, then goin to sleep hopin itll never get day. But
it always does. Its all night somewheres, I guess, spite of what
the missionaries says. Thats fer menight always! No comin day, no
gettin up, somewhere to hide snug in always!

He walked on with head dropped forward upon his breast, skirting the
base of the bluffs, now seemingly oblivious of the sound of hoofs that
grew momently more distinct.

As he walked, he was dimly conscious of passing the dark mouth of a
hole running back into the clay of a bluff. He proceeded until he found
himself again at the edge of the river, staring down into a broad,
black fissure in the ice, caused, doubtless, by the dash of the current
crossing from the other side.

A terrible, dark, but alluring thought seized him. Here was the
placethe doorway to that place where it was always night! Why not go
in? There would be no more running away, no more hiding, no more hatred
of men, no more lonesomeness! Here was the place at last.

He stepped forward and stooped to gaze down into the door of night. The
rushing waters made a dismal, moaning sound.

He stared transfixed. Yes, he would go!

Suddenly a shudder ran through his limbs. He gave a quick exclamation
of terror! He leaped back and raised his face to the skies.

How kind and soft and gentle and good to look upon was the sky! He
gazed aboutit was so fair a world! How good it was to breathe! He
longed to throw his great, brute arms about creation and clutch it to
him, and hold it, hold it, hold it! He wished to live.

_The hoofs!_

The distant muffled confusion of sound had grown into sharp, distinct,
staccato notes. The pursuers were now less than a mile away. Soon they
would reach the river.

With the quick instinct of the hunted beast, Antoine knew the means
of safety. His footprints led to the ice-fissure. He decided that
none should lead away. He could not be pursued under ice. Stooping so
that he could look between his legs, he began retracing his steps,
walking backward, placing his feet with infinite care where they had
fallen before. Thus he came again to the hole in the clay bluff, and
disappeared. His trail had passed within a foot of the hole, which was
overhung by a jutting point of sandstone. No snow had fallen at the
entrance; he left no trail as he entered.

Stopping upon his hands and knees, he listened and could hear
distinctly the sharp crack of hoofs upon the ice and the pop and
thunder of the frozen surface.

Heres _some_ luck, muttered Antoine. He crawled on into the nether
darkness of the hole that grew more spacious as he proceeded. As he
crawled, the sound of pursuing hoofs grew dimmer. Antoine half forgot
them. His keen sense had caught the peculiar musty odour of animal
life. He felt a stuffy warmth in his nostrils as he breathed.

Suddenly out of the dark ahead grew up two points of phosphorescent
light. Antoine fell back upon his haunches with a little growl of
surprise in his throat. Years of wild lonesome life had made him more
beast than man.

The lights slowly came closer, growing more brilliant. Then there was
a harsh, rasping growl and a sound of sniffing. Antoine waited until
the expanding pupils of his eyes could grasp the situation with more
distinctness. Cant run, he mused. Lariat behind, somethin growlin
in front. Its one more fight. Here goes fer my damnedest. Rather die
mad and fightin than jump into cold water or stick my head through a
rawhide necktie!

He crawled on carefully. The lights approached with a strange swaying
motion. Then of a sudden came a whine, a sharp, savage yelp, and
Antoine felt his cheek ripped open with a stroke of gnashing teeth!

He felt for an instant the hot breath of the beast, the trickle of
hot blood on his cheek; and then all that was human in him passed. He
growled and hurled the sinewy body of his unseen foe from him with
a blow of his bear-like paw. He was a big man, and in his blood the
primitive beast had grown large through long years of lonesome hiding
from his kind.

The dark hole echoed a muffled howl of anger, and in an instant man and
beast rolled together in the darkness. It was a primitive struggle; the
snapping of jaws, the rasping of hoarse throats that laboured with
angry breath, snarlings of hate, yelps of pain, growls, whines.

At last the man knew that it was a grey wolf he fought. He reached for
its throat, but felt his hand caught in a hot, wet, powerful trap of
teeth. He grasped the under jaw with a grip that made his antagonist
howl with pain. Then with his other hand he felt about in the darkness,
groping for the throat.

He found it, seized it with a vice-like clutch, shut his teeth
together, and threw all of the power of his massive frame into the
struggle.

Slowly, slowly, the struggles of the wolf became weaker. The lean,
hairy form fell limply, and the man laughed with a strange, sobbing,
guttural mirthfor he was master.

Then again he felt the trickle of blood upon his cheek, the ache of his
bitten hand. His anger returned with double fury. He kicked the limp
body as he lay beside it, never releasing his grip.

Suddenly he forgot to kick. There were sounds! He heard the _thump
thump_ of hoofs passing his place of refuge. Then they ceased. There
were sounds of voices coming dimly; then after a while the hoofs passed
again, and there was a voice that said saved hangin anyway.

The hoof beats grew dimmer, and Antoine knew by their hollow sound
that his pursuers had begun to cross the ice on the back trail. He
again gave his attention to the wolf. It lay very still. A feeling of
supreme comfort came over Antoine. It was sweet to be a master. He
laid his head upon the wolfs motionless body. He was very weary, he
had conquered, and he would sleep upon his prey.

He awoke feeling a warm, rasping something upon his wounded cheek. A
faint light came in at the entrance of the place. It was morning. In
his sleep Antoine had moved his head close to the muzzle of the wolf.
Now, utterly conquered, bruised, unable to arise, the brute was feebly
licking the blood from the mans wound.

Antoines sense of mastery after his sound sleep made him kind for
once. He was safe and something had caressed him, altho it was only a
soundly-beaten wolf.

You pore devil! said Antoine with a sudden softness in his voice; I
done you up, didnt I? You haint so bad, I guess; but if I hadnt done
you, Id got done myself. Hurt much, you pore devil, eh?

He stroked the side of the animal, whereupon it cried out with pain.

Pretty sore, eh? Well as long as Im biggern you, Ill be good to
you, I will. I aint so bad, am I? You treat me square and you wont
never get no bad deals from the half-breed; mind that. Hel-_lo_! youre
a _Miss_ Wolf, aint you? Well, for the present, Im a Mister Wolf,
and Im a good un! Let me hunt you up a name; somethin soft like a
woman, cause you did touch me kind of tender like. _Susette!_thats
it_Susette_. Youre Susette now. I haint got no people, so Im a
wolf from now on, and my names Antoine. Susette and Antoinesounds
pretty good, dont it? Say, I know as much about bein a wolf as you
do. Cant teach me nothin about sneakin and hidin and fightin! Say,
old girl, _haint_ I a tolable good fighter now? O, I know I am, and
when you need it again, youre goin to get it good and hard, Susette;
mind that. Haint got nothin to eat about the house, have you, old
girl? Then, bein head of the family with a sick woman about, Im goin
huntin. Dont you let no other wolf come skulkin around! You know me!
Ill wear his skin when I come back, if you dont mind!

And he went out.

Before noon he returned bringing three jack rabbits, having shot them
with his six-shooter. Well, Susette, said he, got any appetite?

He passed his hand over the wolfs snout caressingly. The wolf flinched
in fear, but the man continued his caresses until she licked his hand.

Now were friends and we can live together peaceable, cant we? Took
a big family row, though. Families needs stirrin up now and then, I
reckon.

He skinned a rabbit and cut off morsels of meat.

Here, Susette, Im goin to fill your hide first, cause youve been
so good since the row that Im half beginnin to love you a little.
There, thats iteat. Does me good to see you eat, pore, sick Susette!

The wolf took the morsels from his hand and a look almost tame came
into her eyes. When she had eaten a rabbit, Antoine had a meal of
raw flesh. Then he sat down beside her and stroked her nose and neck
and flanks. There was an air of home about the place. He was safe and
sheltered, had a full stomach, and there was a fellow creature near
him that showed kindness, altho it had been won with a beating. But
this man had long been accustomed to possessing by violence, and he was
satisfied.

Susette, he said in a soft voice; dont get mean again when you get
well. I want to live quiet and like somethin that likes me oncet.
If youll be good, Ill get you rabbits and antelope and birds, and
you wont need to hunt no more nor go about with your belly flappin
together. And I know how to make firesomethin you dont know, wise as
you be; and Ill keep you warm and pet you.

Is it a bargain? All you need to do is just be good, keepin your
teeth outn my cheek. Ive been lonesome always. I haint got no
people. Do you know who your dad was, Susette? Neither do I. Some
French trader was mine, I guess. Were in the same boat there. My
mother was an Omaha. O Susette, I know what it means to set a stranger
in my mothers lodge. _Wagah peazzha!_ [no good white man], thats
what the Omahas called me ever since I was a little feller. And the
white men said damn Injun. And where am I? O, hangin onto the edge
of things, gettin ornry and nasty and bad! Ive stole horses and
killed people and cussed fer days, Susette. And I want to rest; I want
to love somethin. Cabannes men down at the post would laugh to hear
me sayin that. But I do. I want to love somethin. Tried to oncet;
her name was Susette, jest like yourn. She was a traders daughtera
pretty French girl. That was before I got bad. I talked sweet to her
like Im a talkin to you, and she kind of liked it. But the old man
Lecroixthat was her dadhe showed me the trail and he says: Go that
way and go fast, you damn Injun!

I went, Susette, but I made him pay, I did. I seen him on his back
a-grinnin straight up at the stars; and since then I haint cared
much. I killed several after that, and I called em all Lecroix!

Be a good girl, Susette, and Ill stick to you. Im a good fighter,
you know, and Im a good grub-hunter, too. I learned all that easy.

He continued caressing the wolf, and she licked his hand when he
stroked her muzzle.

Days passed; the winter deepened; the heavy snows came. Antoine nursed
his bruised companion back to health. Through the bitter nights he kept
a fire burning at the entrance of the hole. The depth of the snow made
it improbable that any should learn his whereabouts; and by that time
the news must have spread from post to post that Antoine, the outlaw
half-breed, had drowned himself in the ice-fissure.

The man had used all his ammunition, and his six-shooter had thus
become useless. With the skill of an Indian he wrought a bow and
arrows. He made snowshoes and continued to hunt, keeping the wolf in
meat until she grew strong and fat with the unaccustomed luxurious life.

Also she became very tame. During her weakness the man had subdued her,
and through the long nights she lay nestled within the mans great arms
and slept.

When the snow became crusted, Antoine and Susette went hunting
together, she trotting at his heels like a dog. To her he had come
to be only an unusually large wolfa masterful male, a good fighter,
strong to kill, a taker of his own.

One evening in late December, when the low moon threw a shaft of cold
silver into the mouth of the lair, Antoine lay huddled in his furs,
listening to the long, dirge-like calls of the wolves wandering inward
from the vast pitiless night. Susette also listened, sitting upon her
haunches beside the man with her ears pricked forward. When the far
away cries of her kinspeople arose into a compelling major sound, dying
away into the merest shadow of a pitiful minor, she switched her tail
uneasily, shuffled about nervously, sniffing and whining.

Then she began pacing with an eager swing up and down the place to the
opening and back to the man, sending forth the cry of kinship whenever
she reached the moonlit entrance.

Nights cold, Susette, said Antoine; taint no time fer huntin.
Haint I give you enough to eat? Come here and snuggle up and lets
sleep.

He caught the wolf and with main force held her down beside him. She
snarled savagely and snapped her jaws together, struggling out of his
arms and going to the opening where she cried out into the frozen
stillness. The answer of her kind floated back in doleful chorus.

Dont go! begged the man. Susette, my pretty Susette! Ill be so
lonesome.

As the chorus died, the wolf gave a loud yelp and rushed out into the
night. A terrible rage seized Antoine. He leaped from his furs and
ran out after the wolf. She fled with a rapid, swinging trot over the
scintillating snow toward the concourse of her people. The man fled
after, slipping, falling, getting up, running, running, and ever the
wolf widened the glittering stretch of snow between them. To Antoine,
the ever-widening space of glinting coldness vaguely symbolised the
barrier that seemed growing between him and his last companion.

Susette, O, Susette! he cried at last, breathless and exhausted.
His cry was dirge-like, even as the wolves; thin and sharp and
ice-likethe voice of the old world-ache.

She had disappeared in the dusk of a ravine. Antoine, huddled in the
snows with his face upon his knees, sobbed in the winter stillness. At
last, with slow and faltering step, he returned to his lair; and for
the first time in months he felt the throat-pang of the alien.

He threw himself down upon the floor of the cave and cursed the world.
Then he cursed Susette.

Its some other wolf! he hissed. Some other grey dog that shes gone
to see. O, damn him! damn his grey hide! Ill kill her when she comes
back!

He took out his knife and began whetting it viciously upon his boot.

Ill cut her into strips and eat em! Wasnt I good to her? O, Ill
cut her into strips!

He whetted his knife for an hour, cursing the while through his set
teeth. At last his anger grew into a foolish madness. He hurled himself
upon the bunch of furs beside him and imagined that they were Susette.
He set his teeth into the furs, he crushed them with his hands, he tore
at them with his nails. Then in the impotence of his anger, he fell
upon his face and sobbed himself to sleep.

Strange visions passed before him. Again he killed Lecroix, and saw the
dead face grinning at the stars. Again he sat in his mothers lodge and
wept because he was a stranger. Again he was fleeing, fleeing, fleeing
from a leather noose that hung above him like a black cloud, and
circled and lowered and raised and lowered until it swooped down upon
him and closed about his neck.

With a yell of fright he awoke from his nightmare. His head throbbed,
his mouth was parched. At last day came in sneakingly through the
openinga dull, melancholy light; and with it came Susette, sniffing,
with the bristles of her neck erect.

Susette! Susette! cried the man joyfully.

He no longer thought of killing her. He seized her in his arms; he
kissed her frost-whitened muzzle; he caressed her; he called her
a woman. She received his caresses with disdain. Whereat the man
redoubled his acts of fondness. He fed her and petted her as she ate;
whereat the bristles on her neck fell. She nosed him half fondly.

And Antoine, man-like, was glad again. He contented himself with
touching the frayed hem of the garment of Happiness.

He ate none that day. He said to himself, I wont hunt till its all
gone; she can have it all. He was afraid to leave Susette. He was
afraid to take her with him again into the land of her own people.
Antoine was jealous.

All day he was kind to her with the pitiful kindness of a doting lover
for his unfaithful mistress.

That night she consented to lie within his arms, and Antoine cried
softly as he whispered into her ear: Susette, I haint a goin to be
jealous no more. Youve been a bad girl, Susette. Dont do it again. I
wont be mean lessn you let _him_ come skulkin round here, damn his
grey hide! But O, Susettehis voice was like a spoken pangI wishtI
wisht I was that other wolf!

The next morning Antoine did not get up. He felt sore and exhausted. By
evening his heart was beating like a hammer. His head ached and swam;
his burning eyes saw strange, uncertain visions.

Susette, he called, I haint quite right; come here and let me touch
you again.

Night was falling and Susette sat sullenly apart, listening for the
call of her people. She did not go to him. All night the man tossed and
raved. After a lingering age of delirious wanderings, dizzy flights
from huge pitiless pursuers, he became conscious of the daylight. He
raised his head feebly and looked about the den. Susette was gone.
A fury of jealousy again seized Antoine. She had gone to that other
wolfhe felt certain of that. He tried to arise, but the fever had
weakened him so that he lay impotently, torn alternately with anger and
longing.

Suddenly a frost-whitened snout was thrust in at the opening. It was
Susette. The man was too weak to cry out his joy, but his eyes filled
with a soft light.

Susette entered sniffing strangely, whining and switching her tail as
she came. At her heels followed another grey wolfa male, larger-boned,
lanker, with a more powerful snout. He whined and moved his tail
nervously at sight of the man.

Antoine lay staring impotently upon the intruder. So thats him,
thought the man; I wisht I could get up.

A delirious anger shook him; he struggled to arise, but could not. O
God, he moaned; it was an unusual thing for this man to say the word
so; O God, please le me get up and fight!

A harsh growl stopped him. The grey intruder approached him with a
rapid, sinuous movement of the tail. His jaws grinned hideously with
long sharp teeth displayed. The rage of hunger was in his eyes fixed
steadily upon the sick man.

Antoine stared steadily into the glaring eyes of his wolfish rival,
already crouching for the spring.

On a sudden, a strange exhilaration came over the man. He seemed
drinking in the essence of life from the pitiless stare of his
adversary. His great limbs, seeming devitalised but a moment before,
now tingled to their extremities with a sudden surging of the wine of
life. His eyes, which the fever had burned into the dulness of ashes,
flamed suddenly again with the eager lust of fight.

He raised himself upon his haunches, beast-like, and with the lifting
of a sneering lip that disclosed his grinding teeth, he gave a cry that
was both a snarl and a sob. In that moment, these many centuries of
artificial life were as a vanished dream. From the long-slumbering dust
of the prehistoric cave-man came a giant spirit to steel the sinews of
its far removed and weaker kin.

Antoine met the impetuous spring of the wolf with the downward blow
of a fist, and sprang whining upon his momentarily worsted foe. Never
before had he fought in all his bitter pariah life as now he fought for
the possession of his last companion.

His antagonist was larger than Susette, the survivor of many moonlit
battles to the death in the frozen, foodless wilderness of hills.

Antoine struggled not as a man; he was now merely the good, glorious,
fighting beastmasterful, primitive, the keeper of his own. Lacerated
with the snapping of powerful jaws, bleeding from his face and hands,
the man felt that he was winning. With a whining cry, less than half
human, he succeeded in fixing his left hand upon the hairy throat,
crushed the wolf down upon its back, and with prodigious strength,
began pressing the fingers of his right hand in between the protruding
lower ribs. He would tear them out! He would thrust his hand in among
the vitals of his foe!

All the while Susette, whining and switching her tail, watched with
glowing eyes the struggle of the males, and waited for the proof of the
master.

At this juncture she arose with a nervous, threatening swaying of the
head, approached the two cautiously, then hurled herself into the
encounter. She leaped with a savage yelp upon him who had long been her
master.

The mans grip relaxed. He fell back and threw out his arms in which
once more the weakness of the fever came.

Susette! he gasped; I was good to you; I

His voice was choked into a wheeze. Susette had gripped him by the
throat, and the two were upon him.

She had gone back to the ways of her kindand the man was an alien.




II

THE LOOK IN THE FACE


IT was after one of the Saturday night feasts at No-Teeth Lodge that I
drew my old friend, Half-a-Day, to one side where the shadows were not
broken by the firelight.

Tell me another story, Half-a-Day, I said.

He grunted and puffed at his pipe in silence.

Have I not given much cow meat to the feast and did I not throw silver
on the drums?

Ah, he assented.

Then I wish to hear a story.

You are my friend, he began with majestic deliberation, speaking in
his own tongue; for we have eaten meat together from the same kettle
and looked upon each other through the pipe smoke. It will therefore
make me glad to tell you a story about buffalo meat

Ah, about a hunt?

And a _me-zhinga_ [girl]

Oh, a love story!

And a man whom I wished to kill.

Good! And did you kill him?

My brother is like all his white brothers, who leap at things. Never
will they wait. If I said yes or no, then would I have no story.

Then give me a puff at the pipe, Half-a-Day, and I will be patient.

Half-a-Day gave me the pipe and began, with eyes staring through the
fire and far away down the long trail that leads back to youth.

Many winters and summers ago I was a young man; now I am slow when
I walk and my head looks much to the ground. But I remember, and now
again I am young for a little while. I can smell the fires in the
evening that roared upward then, even tho they are cold these many
moons and their ashes scattered. And I can see the face of Paezha
[flower], the one daughter of Douba Mona, for my eyes are young too.
And Douba Mona was a great man.

Paezha was not so big as the other squaws, and could never be so big,
because she was not made for building tepees and bringing wood and
water. She was little and thin and good to see like some of your white
sisters, and there was no face in the village of my people like her
face. Her feet touched the ground with a light touch like a little wind
from the south; her body bent easily like a willow; I think her eyes
were like stars.

I smiled here, because the simile has become so trite among us white
lovers. But Half-a-Day saw me not; he looked down the long trail that
leads back to youth, leading through and beyond the fire.

And I looked upon her face until I could see nothing elsenot the
sunrise nor the sunset nor the moon and stars. Her face became a
medicine face to me; because I was a young man and it was good to see
her. And also, I was a poor young man; my father had few ponies, and
her father had as many as one could see with a big look.

But I was strong and proud and in the long nights I dreamed of Paezha,
till one day I said: I will have her and I will fight all the braves
in all the villages before I will give her up. Then afterwards I will
get many ponies like her father.

So one evening when the meat boiled over the fires, I went down to
the big spring and hid in the grass, for it was the habit of Paezha to
bring cold water to her father in the evenings, carrying it in a little
kettle no bigger than your head covering, for she was not big.

And I lay waiting. I could not hear the bugs nor the running of the
spring water nor the wind in the willows, because my heart sang so loud.

And I heard a stepand it was Paezha. She leaned over the spring,
and looked down; then there were two Paezhas, so my wish for her was
doubled and had the strength of two wishes.

I arose from the grass. She looked upon me and fear came into her
eyes; for there was that in my face which wished to conquer, and I was
very strong. Like the _tae-chuga_ [antelope] she leaped and ran with
wind-feet down the valley. I was without breath when I caught her, and
I lifted her with arms too strong, for she cried.

Half-a-Day reached toward me for the pipe and puffed strongly. His
eyes were masterful, with the world-old spirit of the conquering male
in them.

Then as I held her, I looked upon her face and saw what I had never
seen before: a look in the face that was sad and weak and frightened,
begging for pity. Only it was not all that; it was shining like the
sun through a cloud, and it was stronger than I, for I became weak and
could hold her no longer. A little while she looked with wide eyes upon
me; and then I saw what makes the squaws break their backs carrying
wood and water and _zhinga zhingas_ [babies]; also what makes men fight
and do great deeds that are not selfish.

Then she ran from me and I fell upon my face and cried like a _zhinga
zhinga_ at the back of a squawI know not why.

Half-a-Day puffed hard at his pipe, then sighing handed it to me.

Have you seen that look in the face, White Brother? he said, staring
upon me with eyes that mastered me.

I am very young, I answered.

But when you see it, it will make you old, continued Half-a-Day; for
when I arose and went back to the village I was old and nothing was the
same. From that time I could look into the eyes of the biggest brave
without trembling, for I was a man and I had seen the look.

And it was in the time when the sunflowers die, the time for the
hunting of bison. So the whole tribe made ready for the hunt. One
morning we rode out of the village on the bison trail; and we were
so many that the foremost were lost in the hills when the last left
the village. And we all sang, but the ponies neighed at the lonesome
lodges, for they were leaving home.

Many days we travelled toward the evenings, and there was song in me
even when I did not sing; for always I rode near Paezha, who rode in
a blanket swung on poles between two ponies, for she was the daughter
of a rich man. And I spoke gentle words to her, and she smiledbecause
she had seen my weakness in the valley of the big spring. Also I picked
flowers for her, and she took them.

But one day Black Dog rode on the other side of her and spoke soft
words. And a strange look was on the face of Paezha, but not the look
I had seen. So I drove away the bitterness of my heart and spoke good
words to Black Dog. But he was sullen, and also he was better to look
upon than I. I can say this now, for I have felt the winds of many
winters.

Many sleeps we rode toward the places of the evening. The moon was
thin and small and bent like a childs bow when we started, and it hung
low above the sunset. And as we travelled it grew bigger, ever farther
toward the place of morning, until it was like a white sun. Then at
last it came forth no more, but rested in its black tepee after its
steep trail.

And all the while we strained our eyes from many lonesome hilltops,
but saw no bison. Scarcer and scarcer became the food, for the summer
had been a summer of fighting; we had conquered and feasted much,
hunted little.

So it happened that we who were strong took less meat that the weaker
might live until we found the bison. And all the time the strength of
Paezhas face grew upon me, so that I divided my meat with her. It made
me sing to see her eat.

One day she said to me: Why do you sing, Half-a-Day, when the people
are sad? And I said: I sing because I am empty. And Black Dog, who
rode upon the other side, he did not sing. So she said to him: Why do
you not sing, Black Dog? Is it because we do not find the bison? And
Black Dog said: I do not sing because I am empty.

All day I was afraid that Paezha had judged between us, seeing me so
light of thought and deed.

One evening we stopped for the night and there was not enough meat
left to keep us three sleeps longer. The squaws did not sing as they
pitched the tepees. They were empty, the braves were empty, and the
_zhinga zhingas_ whined like little baby wolves at their mothers
backs, for the milk they drank was thin milk. No one spoke. The fires
boomed up and made the hills sound as with the bellowing of bulls, and
the sound mocked us. The dark came down; we sat about the fires but we
did not speak. We groaned, for we were very empty, and we could not eat
until we had slept. Once every sleep we ate, and we had eaten once.

That night the wise old men gathered together in the tepee of the
chiefs and sang medicine songs that Wakunda [God] might hear and see
our suffering; then might he send us the bison.

I heard the songs and I felt a great strength grow up out of my
emptiness. Then I said: I will go to the fathers and they will send
me in search of the bison; and I will find the bison for Paezha that
she may not starve. I had forgotten myself and my people. I knew only
Paezha, for that day I had heard her moan, having nothing more to give.

And I went to the big tepee. I stood amongst the fathers and lifted
a strong voice in spite of my emptiness: Give me a swift pony and a
little meat and I will find the bison!

And the old men sighed as they looked upon me. And Douba Mona, her
father, being one of the wise men, said: I see a light in his eye and
hear a strength in his voice. Give him the swift pony and the little
meat. If he finds the bison, then shall he have Paezha, for well I see
that there is something between them. Also he shall have many ponies; I
have many.

And these words made me full as though I had sat at a feast.

So the next morning I took the swift pony and the little meat and
galloped toward the evening. The people did not take the trail that
day, for toil makes hunger.

Two sleeps I rode, singing songs and dreaming dreams of Paezha. And
on the evening of the third sunlight I stopped upon a hill, and turned
my pony loose to feed. I was sick and weak because my emptiness had
come back upon me and I had not yet found the bison. I fell upon my
face and moaned, and my emptiness sent me to sleep.

When I awoke, someone sat beside meand it was Black Dog. He breathed
soft words. I have come to watch over Half-a-Day, he said, because I
am older and a bigger man.

I spoke not a word, but my heart was warm toward Black Dog, for my
dreams of Paezha had made me kind.

Well I know, he said, and his voice was soft as a womans; well I
know what Half-a-Day dreams about. And I have come to watch over him
that his dream may come true.

Then being a young man and full of kindness, I told Black Dog of the
look I had seen in the face of Paezha. And he bit his lips and made a
sound far down in his throat that was not pleasant to hear. And I fell
to sleep wondering much.

When I awoke, the ponies were gone, the meat was gone, Black Dog was
gone. I grew strong as a bear. I shrieked into the stillness! I shook
my fists at the sun! I cursed Black Dog! I stumbled on over the hills
and valleys, shouting, singing, hurling big words of little meaning
into the yellow day.

Before night came I found the body of a dead wolf, and I fell upon it
like a crow. I tore its flesh with my teeth. I called it Black Dog. I
ate much. It smelled bad. I found a little stream and drank much. It
was almost lost in the mud. I slept and dreamed of Paezha. I awoke,
and it was day again. I found the dead wolf again. I ate. Then I was
stronger and I went on into the empty yellow prairie.

Toward evening I heard a thundering, yet saw no cloud. It was the dry
time. Still it thundered, thunderedyet no cloud. I ran to the top of a
hill and gazed.

Bison! Bison! The prairie was full of bison, and they were feeding
slowly toward the camp of my people.

I turned, I ran! I did not make a sound, tho I wished to cry out. I
needed all my strength for running, for I had no pony. I ran, ran, ran.
I fell, I got up, I fell. Night came; I walked. Morning came; still I
walked. Night came; I stumbled. And in the morning I was creeping.

I do not know when I reached the camp of my people, I remember only
a shouting and a sudden moving of the tribe. And then, after many bad
dreams, I was awake again and the people were feasting. They had found
the bison.

Then, when we were on the home trail, I learned of the treachery of
Black Dog. He had told my people how he had found Half-a-Day dead
upon the prairie, but was too weak to bring him back. And the people
believed for a time. And Black Dog spoke soft words to Paezha, brave
words to Douba Mona, until I was almost forgotten.

But now I was a great man among my people, and Black Dog could not
raise his head, for he had seen hate in the peoples eyes.

And in the time of the first frosts we reached our village and Paezha
became my squaw. Also I got the ponies.

Here Half-a-Day paused to fill his pipe.

It is a good story, Half-a-Day, I said. Half-a-Day lit his pipe,
stared long into the glow of the embers, for the fires had fallen, and
sighed.

I have not spoken yet, he said; for one day in the time of the first
snow, Paezha lay dead in my lodge, and my breast ached. Black Dog had
killed her at the big spring. At the same place where I had first seen
the look, there he killed her.

I remember that I sat beside her two sleeps and cried like a _zhinga
zhinga_. And my friends came to me, whispering bitter words into my
ears. Kill Black Dog, they said. And I said: Bring him here to me,
and I will kill him; my legs will not carry me.

But the fathers of the council would not have it so. And when they had
buried her on the hill above the village, I awoke as from a long sleep,
a very long sleep, and I was full of hate. They kept me in my lodge.
They would not let me kill. I wished to kill! I wished to tear him as I
tore the stinking wolf with my teeth! _I wished to kill!_

Half-a-Day had arisen to his feet, his fists clenched, his eyes
shining with a cold light. He made a tragic figure in the dull, blue
glow of the embers.

Come, Half-a-Day, I said, it is long passed, and now it is only a
story.

It is more than a story! he said. I lived it. I wished to kill!

He sat down again, and a softer light came into his eyes.

And the time came, he went on with a weary voice, when Black Dog
should be cast forth from the tribe, according to the old custom. I
said, I will follow Black Dog, and I will see him die. And he was
cast forth. I followed, and it was very cold. The snow whined under my
feet, and I followed in the night.

But Black Dog did not know I followed. I was ever near him like a
shadow. I did not sleep; I watched Black Dog. I meant to see him die.

In his first sleep I crept upon him. I stole his meat; I stole his
weapons. Now he would die, and I would be there to see. I would laugh,
I would sing while he died.

In the cold, pale morning I lay huddled in a clump of sage and I saw
him get up, look for his meat and weapons, then stagger away into the
lonesome places of the snow. And I sang a low song to myself. The time
would come when I would see Black Dog die. I did not feel the cold; I
did not grow weary; I was never hungry. And in the evenings I was ever
near enough to hear him groan as he wrapped himself in his blankets.
Often I crept up to him and looked upon his face in the light of the
stars, and I saw my time coming, for his face was thinner and not so
good to look upon as in the time when the sunflowers died.

I could have killed him, but then he could not have heard me sing, he
could not have heard me laugh. So I waited and followed and watched. I
ate my meat raw that Black Dog might not see my fire. Also I watched to
see that he found nothing to eat; and he found nothing.

One day I lay upon the summit of a hill and saw him totter in the
valley. Then I could be quiet no longer. I raised my voice and shouted:
Fall, Black Dog! Even so Half-a-Day fell when Black Dog stole his meat
and his pony!

And I saw him get up and stare about, for I was hidden. Then his
voice came up to me over the snow; it was a thin voice: I know you,
Half-a-Day! Come and kill me!

Half-a-Day never killed a sick man nor a squaw, I shouted, and
then I laugheda cold, bitter laugh. Then Black Dog shook his fists
at the four corners of the sky and stumbled off into the hills, and I
followed. Now my time was very near, for Black Dog felt my nearness and
he knew that he would die and I would see him.

And one evening my time came. Black Dog was in the valley by a frozen
stream, and he fell upon his face, sending forth a thin cry as he
fellthin and ice-like. He did not get up. He lay very still.

I ran down to where he layand I laughed, laughed, laughed. I heard
him groan. I rolled him over on his back and looked upon his face.

I wish I had not looked upon his face!

He opened his eyes and they were very dim and sunken. His face was
sharp. I sat down beside him. I said, Now die, and I will sing about
it.

Then his face changed. It became a squaws face_and it had the
look_!a look that was sad and weak and frightened and begging for
pity. And it seemed to me that it was not the face of Black Dog any
more. _It had the look!_ I had seen it in the face of Paezha by the
spring!

Now since I have many winters behind me, I wonder if it was not a
cowards face; but then it was not so. I grew soft. There was a great
springtime in my breast. The ice was breaking up. I wrapped my blankets
about him. I gave him meat. He stared at me and ate like a wolf. I
spoke soft words. I made a fire from the brush that was on the frozen
stream. I warmed him and he grew stronger. All night I watched him and
in the morning I said: Take my bow and arrows, Black Dog; I wish to
die. Go on and live. For I had lost the wish to kill; I only wished to
die. And he said no word; but his eyes were changed.

I staggered away on the back trail. I had no meat, I had no blankets,
I had no weapons. I meant to die.

But I did not die. When I lay down at night, worn-out and half
frozen, someone wrapped blankets about me and built a fire by me. In
the mornings I found food beside me. And so it was for many sleeps
until at last I came to the village of my people, broken, caring for
nothing. And I was thin, my face was sharp, my eyes were sunken, my
step was slow.

And the people looked upon me with wonder, saying: Half-a-Day has
come back from killing Black Dog.

But the truth was different.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Half-a-Day had finished, he stared long into the fire without
speaking.

Do you think Black Dog was all a coward? I asked at length. Perhaps
he only loved too much.

I do not know, said Half-a-Day; I only know sometimes I wish I had
not looked upon his face.




III

FEATHER FOR FEATHER


TUM-UM-UM, tum-um-um, went the drums beaten by the hands of the old
mentoo old for wars, but now grown momentarily youthful with the
victory of the young men who were returning from battle.

Tum-um-um, tum-um-um! So sang the drumsgreat, glad buckskin drums,
exultant beneath the staccato blows of the old mens drumsticks.
Tum-um-um, tum-um-um! Now the women, dressed in their gayest garments
of dyed buckskin, radiant in beads, with the spirit of song upon their
painted faces, came forth in a long file from a lodge and approached
the centre of the open space about which were grouped the mud lodges of
the village.

There, in the centre, sat the old men. The drums were singing a
glad song, in sullen tones, in this hour of victory, for a runner,
breathless with his speed, had brought the good news when the sun was
halfway down the sky, and now the slowly setting sun was blazing on the
evening hills.

Soon the whole victorious band, fresh from their fight with the Sioux,
would come over the hills like an eager, dusty wind, clamorous with
glad tongues and thunderous with the driven hoofs of captured ponies.

So the drums sang and the women came forth and circled about them,
peering beneath hands raised browward, into the deepening shadows of
the valley down which the band would sweep.

They swelled the song of victory, the song of welcome to the victors,
and the look of welcome was already upon their faces as they searched
the deepening shadows.

There came a rumble over the hills as of a hidden storm in time of
drouth, thundering mockingly in the rainless air. The drummers lifted
their sticks with trembling hands and listenedwith one accord they all
listened for the shouts and the hoof beats.

Now the faint treble of distant shouting pierced the growing rumble of
the thunder. It was the braves! They were returning with much glory and
many ponies. The drumsticks fell snarlingly upon the taut buckskin, but
the sound seemed only a whisper, for the entire village was shouting
with a tumult that made the grazing ponies snort upon the hillsides and
gallop away with ears pricked wonderingly.

They come! They come!

The villagers thronged upon that side of the village that looked toward
the hills from whence the thunder deepened. A dust cloud gathered
behind the hills. It grew until it caught the horizontal sunlight and
seemed a scintillating tower of victory. Suddenly the hill above the
valley was thronged with mounted braves, waving their weapons above
their heads and shouting, and a sunlit cloud of glory seemed about them.

The band swept down the hillside and down the valley, and the dust
cloud thickened under the impetuous hoofs that beat the parched and
yellow prairie. When they drew near the opening in the circle of
lodges, the foremost hurled his panting pony back upon its haunches and
the others reared and halted behind, champing at the restraining thongs.

A-ho! shouted the foremost, holding his weapons above his head. We
come from the Sioux! We have many ponies and also scalp-locks! Sing!
For we have fought a good fight and we are not ashamed!

A great shout went up from the village, and the drums snarled. Slowly,
majestically, the circle of women began moving about the drums, keeping
time to the rhythmic beats with a sideward shuffling of their feet in
the dust. In a monotonous minor key the singing of the women beganat
first like the crooning of an Indian mother to a restless child when
the camp fires burn blue, and all the braves are snoring in the dark.

Then it rose into the mournful wail of a wife looking upon a dead
facea wordless, eloquent song. Then, with a burst, it rose into a
treble cry, and words became dimly recognisable amid the ecstasy.

We come, we come, and we are not ashamed! sang the women to the
snarling of the drums. Let the fires roar and the bison meat be
cooked, for we have fought, and now we wish to eat!

Let the women dance and sing that we may be glad after our fighting!
A-ho! A-ho! We travelled farone sleep, two sleeps, three sleeps, but
we slumbered not! We came upon our enemies. They were hidden in the
grass like badgers. They were dressed in yellow grass that they might
hide. We saw them and we shouted with joy, for we were not afraid! The
enemy trembled like wolves who have come to the end of the ravine and
the hunters follow behind!

As the women sang, shuffling about the circle, the braves rode in
single file into the enclosure of the village and formed a circle about
the dance.

I saw a big man among my enemies, sang the women, for so their
song ran. He was strong as a bear and terrible as an elk. His head
was proud with eagle feathers, for many men had he killed. I did not
tremble when he rushed at me; I raised my club and struck him, and he
fell with his eagle feathers. He whimpered like an old woman when she
becomes a child again. He said, I have many ponies for you, and my
children will cry if I do not go back. Spare me! But behold! I have
his scalp lock!

His scalp lock! His scalp lock! shouted the braves, as the words of
the song were drowned again in the minor drone that followed the snarl
of the drums. And they waved scalp locks above their headsthe locks of
the fallen Sioux.

Out of the droning the song of the women grew again. It became more
ecstatic, running the gamut of human passionfrom the shrill shriek of
defiance to the mournful wail for those who had fallen in the battle.
And then the shuffling stopped; the song died away into a drone and
ceased, like the song of a locust at the end of a sultry evening. The
drums snarled no more, a great silence fell, the sun had sunk beneath
the hills.

Then, in the silence and the shadows of the evening, one came forth
from among the circle of braves, and, with a slow, majestic bending of
the knees, danced in a circle about the women and the drums, that began
again as an accompaniment to the song that he would sing.

Round and round the circle he danced, improvising a song to the rhythm
of the drums, in which he sang his prowess, and the whole village
shouted when he reached the end of his song, for he told of a good
fight and a strong arm, and he had been great in battle.

Then, amid the shouting, another came forth to dance and sing, for he
too had done great things. It was White Cloud, and he was great among
his people. Round and round the circle he danced to the tune of the
drums, dodging imaginary arrows, leaping upon imaginary foes, striking
huge blows at the heads of warriors hidden in the shadow.

See! he shouted in his song, and his voice was loud and masterful,
for a murmur of praise had passed among the people. See! White Cloud
brings the scalp lock of a chief. He took it alone with his strong
hand. The scalp lock of a big Sioux chief! Who has done a greater deed
than White Cloud? Then let the old men place the eagle feather in his
hair that he may be known among his people.

Once again the dancing stopped and the drums ceased their droning.
White Cloud approached the old men, who slowly placed the eagle feather
in his hair.

But one among the assembled braves did not give his voice to the shout
that ensued.

His gaze narrowed with hatred as he looked upon White Cloud, and his
body trembled as a strong tree that stands alone in the path of a
tempest.

Then as White Cloud strode proudly to the inner rim of the circle of
braves, with the tall eagle feather in his hair, another came forth
bearing with him his bow and his arrows. It was he who had found no
voice in which to celebrate White Clouds valour.

He was tall and sinewy, and he had the clear-cut, cruel face of a hawk,
now dark with a darkness deeper than the shadow of the evening. It was
Little Weasel.

Erect, quivering like a strong bow in the clutch of a mighty warrior,
he walked into the open space, and the drums once more began their
wailing. But Little Weasel raised one trembling hand and commanded
silence.

Fathers, he said, and his voice was low, vibrant with the growl of a
wounded beast in it, Little Weasel needs no drums to help him fill the
stillness.

The people bent forward, hushed, because there was something deeper
than shadow in the face of Little Weasel as he turned his hawks gaze
upon the bowed head of White Cloud.

Little Weasel has words to utter, but they are not song words nor
dance words. Let the women and cowards sing and dance!

Still the head of White Cloud was bowed, and Little Weasel laughed a
strange laugh.

Who took the scalplock of the big Sioux chief? shouted Little Weasel.
I, Little Weasel, took it! One sleep, two sleeps, I kept it close
beside me; for I am a young man and I wanted to hear the shouts of my
people. But in the third sleep a great heaviness came upon me, and when
I awoke my Sioux scalp lock had been stolen from me. Now I know the
badger who crept upon me in my heaviness and stole my honour from me.
Look! You have placed the eagle feather in his hair!

In the hush that filled that shadowed place naught but the heavy
breathing of the people was heard. Little Weasel fitted a feathered
arrow to his bow.

See! he cried. I do not cry about my stolen feather. I give another!

The bow-thong twanged, the arrow sang, and lodged deep in White Clouds
breast.

Let White Cloud wear that feather in his breast so that the black
spirits will know him! For look! Already he is among them!

White Cloud had fallen upon his face. Little Weasel dropped his bow
upon the ground, and, raising his hands above his head, he shouted into
the stillness: Fathers, I have given feather for feather!

Then a great cry broke from the assembled braves and the women
shrieked. But Little Weasel shouldered his way through the throng and
went to his lodge, laughing bitterly.

That evening the fires of the feast did not roar upward into the night.
There was no song; there was no babble of glad voices; there was no
bubbling of kettle nor scent of meat.

For a member of the tribe had been murdered by a tribesman, and the
murderer, according to an ancient custom, would be driven forth that
night from the circle of the lodges into the prairie. And the people
sat speechless at the dark doors of their lodges awaiting the signal.

After a long and wordless waiting in the dark, the people saw the
door-flap of the big council lodge swing open, and they held their
breaths, for the time of the casting forth had come.

Through the hush of the starlit night came Little Weasel, pacing slowly
about the circle of the village, and the fathers of the council, slow
with age, followed behind.

Three times the outcast made the rounds, and when he began the fourth
and last circle (for four is a medicine number), the old men who
followed raised their faces to the starlit sky and breathed these words
into the quiet:

Let the people look upon Little Weasel, our brother, for he has killed
a brother and must suffer. Four times shall the bears bring forth their
cubs; four times shall the lone goose fly; four times shall the frogs
sing in the valleys; four times shall the sunflowers grow; and he must
wander, wander. Then shall Little Weasel return and his deed shall be
forgotten. _Wah-hoo-ha-a-a-a!_

Then when Little Weasel came the fourth time to the opening in the
circle of lodges, looking toward the place of sunrise, he saw one
standing in the dark who held a pony by a thong. And Little Weasel
leaped upon the pony, laughed a loud, unpleasant laugh, and urged it
southward into the night.

Throughout the night the people in the village heard strange sounds.
For at times somewhere in the darkness of the hills, something laughed
a loud, unmirthful laugh.

Do you hear it? the people whispered. It is a wolf. For sometimes in
the lonesome nights they laugh so. But the people muffled their ears
in their blankets, for it is not good to hear a wolf laugh almost like
a man.

All night long Little Weasel wandered upon the hills, holding his
grazing pony and looking down upon the starlit village of his people.
He laughed loudly at times, for he was not one of those who sadden
with trouble.

How can I get revenge upon my people? he asked himself. And as yet he
could not answer.

The pale dawn found him sitting upon the hills. Then he arose and
mounted his pony and the three went southwardthe pony, the man, and
the question.

A light wind blew upon his back.

How can I get revenge upon my people? he sang aloud in endless
variation until his question wove itself into a songa battle song, for
Little Weasel had not eaten, and hunger feeds anger. But the light wind
sighing at his back made no answer.

I will go to the country of the Pawnees and make them angry with my
people, he said to himself, and this seemed the answer to his question
until the sun had reached its highest in the sky and the wind had
fallen and the yellow prairie had become parched and bare.

In the afternoon he stopped in the glare of the sun and held one wet
finger above his head that he might learn the source of the wind.

There was a faint breath from the south. As he stood it increased,
coming in little puffs, hot and fitful and dry. Suddenly it came with a
great puff and boomed in the arid gulches.

Little Weasel shouted with joy.

He had heard his answer in the booming of the sudden wind. He
dismounted, and, with a flint and some dry grass, lit a little fire.

The great wind fed it and it grew. Then Little Weasel collected a bunch
of grass, lit it and rapidly set fire to the dry prairie.

Long, yellow flames leaped up from the sun-cured buffalo-grass, howled
in the wind that grew stronger and stronger, and raced northward toward
the valley where the circled lodges of the Omahas lay.

Now I will go back, said Little Weasel, and the fire shall go with
me. He kicked his pony in the ribs and pointed its head northward.
The wave of flame preceded him, skimming the surface of the grass with
great leaps, gaining strength and fleetness as the dry wind lashed it
from behind.

_Aha-ha-he-ha-ha-ha-ha!_ sang Little Weasel, and the pony, straining
its wiry limbs to keep pace with the yellow giant that ran before,
wheezed and coughed an accompaniment to the song, for the ashes were in
his nostrils.

Over hills, through valleys, across gulches the pony ran, with the wall
of flame ever a strong mans bow-shot ahead of him.

Now the Omahas, who had been deprived of their feast of victory the
evening before, had made the feast fires roar upward throughout the
village that day and much meat had been eaten.

Weary with much dancing and singing and heavy with meat, the evening
twilight found them sleeping heavily. And the night deepened and still
they slept.

But there was one upon whom the feast had laid but a light hand, and
who awoke suddenly in the night with a smell in his nostrils, a
roaring in his ears, and a great light in his eyes. He marvelled, for
the feast fires were dead in their ashes.

He arose, and when he reached the door of his lodge he gave a cry that
woke the sleeping village and brought the people clamouring into the
open air.

Half the earth and half the sky were aflame. The stars had fled before
the great burning. Booming in the strong wind, a wave of flame was
coming over the hills and reaching long, spiteful arms toward the
village in the valley.

Spellbound, the people gazed. Then of a sudden a cry ran among them,
for they had seen, through a momentary rift in the flame and smoke,
high upon the eminence of a peaked, fire-blackened hill, a man
standing upon a ponys back, with his arms above his head. He looked
prodigiously big and seemed to ride upon a flood of fire.

Then the flames closed in, the smoke hid the peaked hill, and
frantically the people fled from their village to a nearby creek, where
they huddled in the stream, and where the loud flame passed over them,
booming on into the north.

When the gray of morning fell upon the blackened prairie, the people
returned to their village. But at the opening in the circle of lodges
stood a mounted man. Both he and his pony were blackened as with fire.
It was Little Weasel.

As his people drew near he raised a wheezing voice and said: Behold
Little Weasel, whom the fire-spirits love! All day I rode across the
hills, thinking of my peoples unkindness. In the evening a great fire
grew up about me. It was not a common fire; it was a medicine fire. It
grew up about me and my pony, and lifted us like the waters of a flood.
And I was frightened till I heard a voice that thundered, and it said:
Little Weasel has been punished by a foolish people. The spirits of
fire will take him back and his people will take him in again. And lo!
here I am, Little Weasel. I want my eagle feather.

And the people, believing many strange things, took him in with a great
feasting.

And from that day they called him by another namePaeda-Nu, the
Fire-Man.

And he was great among his people.




IV

THE SCARS


MY friend, the old frontiersman, poked an extra supply of cobs into the
stove, meditatively watched the sudden flame lick about the husks, then
began this monologue after his usual manner:

       *       *       *       *       *

Yes, Ive got a nice place herenice ranch. Didnt work for it
eitherlied for it!

Now, Im not given much to that sort of thing, as you will grant; but
when I see a place where a good manly twisting of the truth can sweeten
matters up a bit, Im not so scrupulous.

Back in the late fifties I was living in St. Louis, pretty nigh broke,
for all Id lived a hard, industrious life up and down the river. One
day I got a note bearing the postmark of some California mining town,
and it informed me that I had a considerable credit with a certain St.
Louis bank. I never heard directly where the money came from, but I
thought I knew. I bought this place with some of that money, you see.
And theres a little story attached to this.

For a number of years I was employed by the American Fur Company as
expressman. Every winter I made the trip from St. Louis to Fort
Pierre, a distance of about a thousand miles. Carried messages from
headquarters to the posts and from the posts back to headquarters. From
St. Louis to Pierre the trip was made on horseback, and from there up,
other expressmen carried the mail on dog sleds.

Great days, those! Sometimes when I get to thinking over old times, I
wonder if the railroads havent taken some of the iron out of the blood
of men.

In the winter of 50that was the year the gold fever was raging, you
knowI got to Pierre about the middle of February. When I had delivered
the mail and was making ready to start south again with the returns,
old Choteau, the factor of the post, called me into the hut he called
his office, and made an unusual request of me. Weve got a half-breed
here, said he, whos got to be elevated. Understand? Killed a man
in the most atrocious manner. Hes due at a necktie party down at St.
Louis about next spring, and Id rather not keep him at the post; can
you take him down?

I was somewhat younger in those days, and ready for most anything
new. Also, I had found the trail a little lonesome at times. Riding a
preoccupied broncho through hundreds of miles of white silence, hearing
the coyotes yelp, dodging Indians, and bucking blizzards werent ever
calculated to be social functions, you know. So I was glad to have
company on the trail, even if it had to be the company of a criminal.
Anyway, I had been so taught in the great rough school of primitive
men, that I had not that loathing for a killer of his kind that is felt
by this generation.

Certainly, said I to the factor. Put him on a mule, and Ill see him
into the government corral at St. Louis. So it was arranged that I
should take the man to the authorities.

I did not hear his name spoken and I didnt take the trouble to ask.
It seemed to me that a man who was being shipped out with a tag on him
reading Nowhere, had little use for a name. No one was apt to dispute
his identity.

Well, they put him on a mule, handcuffed, with a chain to his ankles
passed around the belly of the mule. He was, of course, unarmed, and
I drove him on ahead of me to break trail. He was a powerfully built
fellow, neither tall nor short, and close-knit. He had a face that was
not so bad, showing the French and Indian strains in him plainly. When
we had been riding along silently for several hours, I called to him to
stop and rode up beside him.

I looked into his eyes, and that look satisfied me that I was safe in
doing what I had thought of. His eyes were large and black and quiet.

I am going to take the cussed irons off your legs and arms, I said;
you cant keep warm this way. He watched me taking them off and said
nothing. I threw the irons away. Go on, I said. And he went, giving
me a look that thanked me more than words could have done.

He had the eyes of a brave man. I was never much afraid of a brave man;
its the cowards you have to watch, you know.

All day we rode, saying nothing. In the evening we made a shelter with
our blankets in the bend of a creek where the plum bushes were thick.
The man was a good hand at the business, and seemed anxious to please
me.

We cooked and ate supper, then rolled up in our blankets. I put my two
six-shooters under my head for fear that I might have somehow misread
the mans eyes.

When I awoke in the morning, he had breakfast cooked and the nags
saddled. When we were eating I said: Why didnt you take my horse and
run away? I could never have caught you with the mule.

He searched me for a moment with his eyes.

Because Im not a coward, he said.

And all day we rode again in silence, until, toward evening, he set up
a wild sort of a songa _chanson_ of his fathers, I supposein a voice
that was strong but sweet.

You sing! said I.

Breaking off his song and turning about on his mule, he said quietly,
as though he were discussing the best way to make biscuits when you
havent any soda: Did you ever see a dead liar?

Perhaps, said I; but none in particular.

And that is why you never sing.

That was the last word that day. Up to this time the weather had been
rather too warm for winteran ominous sort of a warm, you know. A mist
hung over the country, drifting with a light wind from the southeast.
During the night the wind whipped into the northwest, and in the
morning we had a genuine frank old blizzard howling around us; one of
those fierce old boys that nobody cares to face. We had camped in a
wooded nook on the south side of the river bluffs and were pretty well
protected, so I decided to lay up there until things brightened up a
bit.

The man, for I had not yet learned his name, which was not necessary,
as the mail I carried attended to that, volunteered to gather wood; and
so I lay in the tent near the fire that roared in front, smoking my
pipe and swapping cusses with myself on account of the delay.

After a while the man came in with a big arm load of wood, whistling
merrily. Well, you beat em all, I said. I say a man who can whistle
like that on his last trip is a game one. Whats your name and who are
you? Here, want to smoke?

I gave him my pipe. He took it and blew rings meditatively for a while.
Well, said he, the name doesnt matter much, and Im the fellow
whos elected to be elevated!

We both laughed strangely, and I began to open my stock of yarns,
truthful and otherwise, to relieve the tedium of the day. I had told a
number of stories when the man seemed to brighten up all at once. His
eyes became on a sudden unusually brilliant.

I know a story thats a fact, said he. Its about a friend of
mineone of the best friends I ever had, I reckon. At least he never
went back on me. Shall I tell it?

Go ahead, said I.

And this is the story he told me:

My friends name is Narcisse. I knew him when he was just a little
shaver. I knew his mother and his father. In fact I was, at one time,
just like one of the family.

Narcisse was a wild sort of a boy always, though I do think his heart
was in the right place, as they say. Never betrayed a friend, never
stole, and never knuckled to an enemy. But he was a wild boy and
didnt stay at home much after he was in his first teens. Knocked
about the world considerable, Narcisse did, and wound up out here in
this God-forsaken end of creation. Worked on a cordelle gang, handled
mackinaws, hammered pack mules, fought Indians, starved and feasted,
froze and toasted, like all the others who come out here. Entered the
fur trade as _engag_ of the Company, and was sent to a post up river.

Now if there was a weak spot in Narcisse, it was his leaning toward
womenfolks. None of your fooling, though! Narcisse loved just like hed
fightpretty serious, you know. When he said a thing, Narcisse he
meant that; and when he wanted to do something real bad, he did thatO,
spite of hell he did that! You know the breed? Well, that was Narcisse.

There was an old French trader living at a post further upold man
Desjardins. He had a daughterPauletteby an Indian woman who died when
the girl was just a baby, and the old man raised her somehowGod knows
howtill she grew to be about the prettiest girl youd see anywhere in
a years tramp, being a good walker. Old man doted on the girl, and
until she was full-grown there wasnt anybody could come nigh enough to
her to make a sweet grin effective. But once Narcisse and his friend,
Jacques Baptiste, got snowed in there on one of their trips.

Now them two, Jacques and Narcisse, was about the best friends you
ever saw, I reckon. They never had any secrets from one another; and
manys the time they had split the last bit of grub on long winter
trails, and made a feast of that little; because there isnt any feast
better than a little grub split between friends, is there?

Now Paulette was a slender little creature with black eyes and lots
of black hair. Lots of hair! That makes a woman fetching, dont you
think so? Well, Narcisse and Jacques sang old French songs during the
blizzard, and kind of got into the old mans heart like. Nothing like
old-time songs to fetch a man when hes got to that place where there
isnt any way to look but back. So the old man made em welcome and
said for em to come back when they could.

On the trip from old man Desjardins place to Pierre, them two friends
talked pretty frank, like they always did. Both of em was in love, and
neither of em was ashamed of it. Told each other so.

When they camped the first night they talked it all over and Narcisse
said: Jacques, weve always split even, but heres where we cant.
Its for one of us all right, but one of us has to go without. How
about this?

And Jacques puffed at his pipe a long time, and after a while he said:
Lets agree that well always go up there together, and let her take
her pick. And Narcisse agreed; so thats the way they fixed it.

Managed to drop in pretty often after that. But there wasnt any way
of telling which was it. One visit shed smile more at Jacques than at
Narcisse, and theyd think it was settled; and then next time it was
tother way.

It was a game, and both of em played it like a game. They were too
good friends to slip a bower or ace up their sleeves. They let Paulette
deal the hands and they played em the best they could, same as honest
poker, you know. And all the time old man Desjardins looked on like the
man that runs the game, a-raking in the ante, which was the singing
and the laughing they did and the things they brought up with em, for
they never came empty-handed.

Well, the next fall came; the game was still on and neither of em
had stole a hand nor a chip that wasnt his. And along about the first
of September the factor of Pierre sent the two friends on a trip to
Benton. They went up on the last boat and were to drop down again in a
maciknaw before the winter set in, after doing a little business for
the Company.

On the trip up Narcisse and Jacques had a quiet little game, which was
poker. They didnt play for moneyplayed for Paulette. Sort of made a
jackpot out of the girl, and it took Jacks or better to open. One deal
and a draw and the high hand could go to see the old man by himself and
close the game that had hung on so long.

Narcisse insisted on having Jacques deal.

Well, said Jacques, after the draw, the jackpots mine!

Narcisse throws down three aces. Jacques gasps a little gasp and
throws his cards face up on the table, turns white and walks away. He
had two pairskings and queens!

There wasnt anything more said about it; but Jacques wasnt the same
man at all. Acted like he was thinking, thinking all the time. Face got
that peaked look that comes of too much thinking; eyes always looking a
long ways off.

How do I know this? Wy, Narcisse told me.

Hurt Narcisse like everything to see this; but hadnt he won fair?
Friends can split even on grub and follow the same trail for years, but
there comes a time when they must smoke their last pipe together at the
forks. But its all part of the game and a man oughtnt to grumble if
he dont get a pat hand, as long as the deals fair.

Narcisse and Jacques got to Benton, and when they got ready to start
back, the river had frozen up, because the winter came down early that
year. So they had another winter trail to follow together before they
reached the forks. The factor at Benton gave em a couple of good dogs
to carry their bedding and they started out afoot.

Jacques didnt have much to say. With that peaked, set look on his
face he went a-trudging on in the snow from sunup to sundown. Narcisse
couldnt help feeling a little happy, because Paulette was the
prettiest girl that ever haunted these parts since the river was dug.
It wasnt any more than human, and hed won fair.

Well, they passed Union and they passed Les Mandanes and they passed
Roubideaux, and then there was a long stretch of lonesome country
ahead of em till they got to Browns Landing, about two hundred miles
above Pierre.

One day it came on to blow and snow, and they made a camp in the
bluff just like we did here. Thats what reminded me of the story.
Jacques made camp while Narcisse was chopping wood. He cut down a dead
cottonwood and when it came down, he tripped up in the deep snow and
the tree fell on him. Broke his leg above the ankle. Well, there he was
a couple hundred miles toward Nowhere in November with one leg.

Pretty hard on Narcisse, wasnt it? But Jacques all at once began to
be his old self again. Set the leg as good as he could and tied it up
so it would stay in place, and joked and was kind to Narcisse.

Seems like old times, pard, said Narcisse to Jacques. Danged if
I wouldnt be glad it happened if we wasnt so far from somewheres;
because we mustnt let the trail fork, old pard. I knew youd be the
same again when I was hard run.

And Jacques smiled and said there never was any hard feeling, he
guessed. But the peaked look didnt go away, nor the far-away look in
the eyes.

When the weather cleared up, Jacques said hed leave a plenty of wood
and grub for Narcisse and hed make a run for Browns Landing and come
back with dogs and a sled. And that made Narcisses heart warm toward
Jacques, because it was just like he was before the girl came between
em.

And Jacques left before sunup one morning, and when it came day
Narcisse went to fix him some breakfast, and there was only enough grub
left for five or six days. That scared him, because it was a long trip
to Browns and back, and he couldnt walk.

But he didnt cuss Jacques. He just said to himself: He didnt go to
take so much, and it was dark when he left. And then he just took the
hand that was dealt him and began playing against a run of hard luck.
The grub lasted only about a week, and close picking at that. Jacques
had plenty of wood chopped up, and Narcisse sat all day by the fire
with his leg aching and his stomach a-gnawing, a-looking down the white
waste towards Browns. And night d come and no dog sled. Then day d
come and hed begin looking, looking. And when the grub was all gone,
he soaked up all the leather there was about him and sucked that. And
then hed begin looking, looking, looking into the white waste, till he
got sos he could see dozens of dog sleds coming and vanishing, coming
and vanishing.

But he didnt cuss Jacques. He said: The poor devils been killed
like as not; he wouldnt go back on his pard. And one day he felt he
was getting too weak to watch much more, and so he set a pole in the
snow with a strip of blanket tied to it; and that tuckered him out sos
he couldnt hardly crawl back to shelter. And with the last strength he
had, he dragged the wood that was left up close to him where he could
reach it, because he knew that in another day he couldnt get up.

And then he began forgetting everything most, and having bad dreams
that scared him, all the time a-worrying about the fire like as if he
was half asleep, and hearing dogs barking, and trying to get up.

And then at last he didnt know anything, till he was on a dog sled
with the feel of hot soup in his belly. And when he came to, he said:
I knowed youd come, Jacques; it was hard sledding without the grub,
though.

And then he found out it wasnt Jacques at all; only some Jesuit
missionaries travelling from the North. Theyd seen his signal of
distress a-flying, and had come and got him.

And still Narcisse didnt cuss Jacques. He said: Poor devils got
killed or something.

And by and by the Jesuits got him to Browns Landing, and he laid up
there till the last of December, getting so he could walk. There wasnt
anybody at Browns who had seen Jacques; and Narcisses heart ached; he
thought sure Jacques was dead.

And when Narcisse got well, he borrowed a horse from the factor at
Browns and went south to Pierre. It was night when he got to the post.
He rode up to the cabin where he and Jacques bached together, and tied
his horse. There was a cheery light coming out of the windows, and
that seemed odd, seeing that Jacques was likely dead somewheres up the
trail. And what seemed stranger, there was someone singing inside, and
every now and then a womand laugh. God! man, did you ever hear a woman
laughing when your heart had been aching for weeks?

Beats the devil! Narcisse thought, how quick folks fill your place
when youre dead! Gave him a tight feeling in the throat to think how
someone was laughing inside, and Jacques somewheres up trail with the
coyotes sniffing at him and the snow blowing over him all day and all
night!

Then Narcisse slips up quiet as could be to the window and peeps in.
He falls back like someone had hit him hard in the face. But nobody
had. All he saw inside was Paulette and Jacques!

Narcisse leans against the cabin, dazed like, for quite a spell.
Seemed like he couldnt get it all through his head at once. Then he
saw it allthe cards had been stacked on him. He shouldve been dead
and he wasnt. That was the trouble.

Didnt cuss Jacques even then, Narcisse didnt. Wasnt madjust ached
in his chest like. And by and by he goes up to the window and taps
on it with his fingers. And Jacques comes out into the starlight,
whistling.

When he runs into Narcisse a-tottering around the corner like a
drunken man, he gasps and leans against the cabin, a-holding on to it
and staring.

Good God!! he wheezes. Good God!

Old pard, says Narcisse; and his voice was like it had smoke in it,
you win; I pass; mines a bob-tail flush; but you stacked the deck!

For Christs sake, Narcisse, whispers Jacques, dont let her see
you! Dont let her hear you! Come on!

And he takes down toward the river, a-walking like the devil was after
him; but it wasnt anybody but Narcisse, limping a little with the bad
leg.

And when they came to the river Jacques didnt seem to have anything
to say but O, its a devil of a mess! A hell of a mess! Said it over
and over like he was half crazy. And Narcisse said: Last fall Id have
killed the man whod said this about you, Jacques. It isnt the girl so
much, Jacques; but you and I have starved and frozen together manys
the time, and we always split fair till now. It was hard sledding up
there without the grub and with only one leg. You stole the cards on me
this deal, Jacques; but Im not going to call for a new deal. Ill play
the hand.

Just that way Narcisse said it. And with Jacques muttering, O, its
a devil of a mess, they came to an air hole where the black water was
gurgling and chuckling.

And all at once Jacques flared up and snarled: Why in hell didnt
you die? And slashing out with a long knife, he made a long gash in
Narcisses scalp, and gave him a shove toward the hole. But he didnt
go in, Narcisse didnt. Hes got that scar yet, but hes got a deeper
one where nobody sees.

And then Narcisse somehow forgot the long trails theyd tramped
together and the starvings and the freezings together. Couldnt think
of anything but the sting of the knife and the trickle of the blood.
And the white starlight swam round him like water in a suck hole, and
got red like blood, and buzzed and hummed. And he was a better man
than Jacquesbetter fighter. And when the light quit swimming around
and got white again and the stillness of the frozen night came back,
Narcisse found himself sobbing and turning his heel round and round in
somebodys mouth. And it was Jacques.

And what does Narcisse get?

The man, after finishing his tale, took a handkerchief from his pocket,
carefully placed it about his throat like a halter, threw his head to
one side and simulated strangulation.

       *       *       *       *       *

We didnt tell any more stories after that. When night came we rolled
up in our blankets, after having made a rousing fire. I did not sleep
much that night. The man did, however. He was the coolest I ever saw.
Went to sleep like a child, knowing full well that he too had a noose
awaiting him.

When I was sure that he was sound asleep, I got up and carefully took
off his bearskin cap, which he had not removed night or day since we
had been together.

I saw by the blue glow of the falling embers that which I had expected
to seea long, ugly gash running across his scalp. It was not yet quite
healed.

In the morning, as the storm had died in the night, we saddled up. You
take the mule and go on ahead, I said; Ill probably catch up with
you by noon.

The man obeyed. I did not expect to catch up with him, but along about
noon I overtook him.

You seem determined to travel my way, I said. He stared at me for
some time, and then said quietly: Im not a coward just because Im
going to hang.

And we rode on together.

The next morning when we had saddled up, I said: _Narcisse_, here is
one of my six-shooters and some ammunition. There is the grub. If you
travel west far enough, you will come at last to the gold country. Ever
think of going to the gold country?

The man gasped and placed his hand to his head. When did I have my cap
off? said he.

You have a good mule there, continued I, evading his question. You
have grub, a gun and ammunition. Why dont you go west?

Why are you saying that? he said.

Because, I answered, because I have seen _both scars_!

A light came into his eyes.

And you? he questioned.

I? said I; well _I_, while conducting a prisoner southward, was
attacked by Indians. The prisoner was killed while defending me with
unusual bravery. I lost all my grub, one gun, some ammunition and a
mule. I barely escaped with my life, and rode like the very devil to
get to the next post. _Go!_

I pointed west. The man slowly fastened the grub sack on his mule,
mounted, gave me a look which I have never forgotten, and rode west.

I have never seen him since. As for me, I got into the next post that
evening with a worn-out horse and a tale of calamity.




V

THE FADING OF SHADOW FLOWER


SHE was only a timid little Omaha maiden with a pair of pensive eyes,
dark like the thunder clouds, and like them, fraught with a potential
fire that seemed ever about to spend its fury in the weakness of tears.
She passed her childhood hours beside the singing streams and in the
lonesome places where the silence lingered. The sunrise and the sunset
found her where the wild flowers clustered, or where the noises of the
nesting birds disturbed the stillness of the thickets. For hers was a
timorous soul, and the dumb kindness of the green things was sweet to
her.

So, as she grew in this wise toward that mysterious time when the
immaturity of the girl bursts into the magic of the woman, her people
said: She talks with the things that talk not; she plays with the wind
that sleeps and moans in the shadowy place. And that is why they named
her Shadow Flower.

In the long, mysterious nights of the winter, Shadow Flower wept with
fear at the mournful cry of the coyotes, and often through the droning
days of the summer did the harsh warning of the startled rattlesnake
send her trembling in terror to her mothers breast. Yet, huddled
close to the group about the evening fire, she loved to listen to the
warriors tales of the strong arm and the fierce heart; and her eyes
glowed with an unwonted light as her kinsmen recounted the wild swoop
of the ambushed foe or the silent pursuit, swift and relentless.

All the glowing ideals of manly prowess that her maiden heart had
conjured, were centred in the person of the fearless brave, Big Axe;
for had he not the eagle glance that went to the heart of an enemy like
an arrow? Was not his the shaggy head of the buffalo bull that strikes
with fear the boldest hunter? The breath of his sinewy breast was like
a whirlwind when the battle cry awakened in his throat! There was no
arm in all the circled tepees that could hurl a tomahawk so straight
and far; and none that could heave above the anger of the battle a war
club more ponderous!

Ah, she would say to herself, while wandering alone with her musings,
Big Axe is so great a man!

When a band of warriors rode out of the village, bent upon some petty
conquest somewhere beyond the blue hills that undulated the horizon
with their summits, Shadow Flower would become very lonely, and she
would stand for long hours upon some larger hill, scanning the dim sky
line for the returning warriors; for where the battle was, there was
Big Axe. And when at last she would catch sight of the returning band,
shouting with the great joy of a battle won, how proudly she stared,
and with what a light in her eyes, at her graceful warrior astride his
swift pony! How anxiously would she search the headdress of her brave
for the fresh eagle feather that should speak of some late deed done by
the strong armher strong arm!

Yet her timorous little soul alone knew of the great overflowing
passion that she treasured for Big Axe; unless, perhaps, the birds and
the green things understood her, for hers was a passion that little
words could not carry.

Thus did the frail flower long for the golden kisses of the sun!

There was war between the Omaha and Ponca tribes. So it happened one
morning, in the time when the deer tear the earth with their horns,
that Shadow Flower, hunting late blossoms upon the sere hills where the
young Dawn danced, heard below her the impatient stamp of ponies, and
beheld the mounting of braves, for Big Axe was leading a party of a
hundred warriors against the enemy.

The purple spikes of the ironweed and the yellow plumes of the
golden-rod dropped from her fingers as she gazed upon the sight below
her. What a sight! It was as the marshalling of the incarnate Winds
from the circle of the heavens. Out of the dust cloud that arose from
the dry earth where four hundred nervous hoofs fretted with impatience
beneath the restraining thongs, she caught the dazzle of the sleek and
vari-coloured hides of the ponies; some white with the brilliance of
the summer sun when it glares upon the false lakes of alkali; some
spotted and wiry as the wild cat; some tawny as the mountain lion; some
black like the midnight when the storm clouds fly.

Their gaunt flanks were heaving with the joy of speed and power. Their
nostrils were distent with the influx of prairie winds that know no
restraining hand save that of the great invisible Master. They snorted
and reared as if about to plunge in a wild heat down the winds. Their
neighing was the shout of the tempest in the rocks, and their gusty
manes were as clouds that tatter in the storm.

And amid this _mle_ of dust and noise and dazzle trembled the gaudy
headdresses of the warriors, bright with the painted wing feathers of
the eagle and the hawk.

Now a shout drowns the neighing and the snorting. A hundred braves
leap to the backs of the plunging ponies. The dust cloud thickens and
sweeps down the valley like a whirlwind. A far glint of brandished
weapons; a dying shout; the band swoops about the base of a hill. Then
the sultry day drones and drowses on the prairie. The grasshopper
breaks the slumber of the stillness with his snapping noise; a lone
hawk skirts the ground with slow, circling flight. But Shadow Flower
stands and stares beneath a shading hand into the brilliance where the
warriors vanished. Her ears hear not the snarl and hum of the drowsy
bugs, nor the shrill chatter of the sly gopher as it rears its striped
body from the grass and peers about. She sees not the circling hawk and
scarcely does the glitter of the yellow grass hurt her eyes. For her
ears are filled with the shout that has died, and in her eyes a sinewy,
masterful brave urges a black pony down the valley.

After a while her hand dropped from her eyes, and catching sight of the
circling hawk, she cried: O you who are so keen of eye, tell me, can
you not see into the heart of Muzape Tunga [Big Axe]? O you who are so
keen of thought, tell me, does he think of Pazha Hu [Shadow Flower]?

But the hawk circled far away and the day droned on.

Among the hills, hidden from one who looked and saw not, the war party
rode on with the noses of its ponies to that portion of the sky from
which the red sun of summer springs, for in that direction lay the
village of the Poncas, perched upon the yellow bluffs of the great
muddy river.

On the evening of the second day the air grew soft with the scent of
flowing waters, and the Omahas, checking their ponies upon the brow of
a hill, beheld to their right the swirling stream, red with the last
light of the day; and before them, across a deep hollow, the village of
the Poncas, upon the summit of a bluff.

But while their eyes wandered over the misty stretches of the river,
a wild shout startled the calm of the scene, while from the village
on the opposite summit a line of mounted warriors issued, taking the
precipitous hillside at a brisk gallop.

The sudden shout and the beat of flying hoofs hurled the weary ponies
of the Omahas back upon their haunches. Yet scarcely had the echoes of
the shout cried their last among the distant bluffs, when a hundred
Omaha bow thongs twanged and a hundred arrows shrieked their shrill
death-song in the quiet evening air. A second and a third flight of
arrows, and the rushing Poncas were thrown into confusion. Those in the
rear were thrown by the floundering bodies of the wounded ponies in the
front, the fury of their momentum hurling them pellmell into the valley
below. Then the Omahas swept down the valley, as the eagle sweeps, with
the battle cry upon their lips, and the remnant of the attacking Poncas
turned and fled up the steep hillside to their village.

The village of the Poncas, in addition to its strong position, was
further fortified by stockades, constructed of saplings driven into
the ground with their tops sharpened. The fugitives having gained
the protection of this barrier, were safe from further pursuit, and
emboldened by their protection, they hurled such a flight of arrows
into the ranks of the enraged Omahas that the latter were obliged to
withdraw beyond arrow flight, contenting themselves with taunting their
besieged foes by displaying the dripping scalps of the fallen.

Now the influence of the fading evening cooled the anger and hushed
the shouting. From the height whither the assaulting band withdrew to
camp, one could hurl the triumphant gaze unnumbered bowshots westward,
athwart the brown hills that seemed to have been stricken motionless in
liquid turbulence by the enchantment of the sunset, marvellous with the
pomp of streamers, violet, purple, saffron, sanguine, dun!

Far up the river the blue haze of the sky-fringed woodland blended
into the purple shadow beneath the contrasting yellow of the bluffs,
that looked down into the smooth waters, upon their own scarred and
wrinkled images crowned with golden crowns by the last scant sunlight.
The cottonwoods placed their long shadows like soothing fingers on the
muddy madness of the central stream. The Night awakened in the east and
stretched its long black arms into the west, and the glory vanished.
The distant woodland and the bluffs grew into indistinguishable masses.
The river became a faint film above a lower concave of dawning stars.
The camp fires in the village reared long towers of light into the
darkness, then fell back into a sleepy glow.

One dreaming out a sunset on the prairie cannot wonder at the exquisite
hyperbole of the Omaha language; that tongue nurtured amid marvellous
possibilities of fury and calm, of beauty and terror, all within the
sight-tiring circle of stupendous distance.

The dawn came, and by the first light the Poncas beheld their enemies
camped across the valley. Upon one side the bluff fell sheer to the
river; upon the other lingered a cruel and patient foe. So it happened
that after many days, moans of suffering arose from the lodges on the
bluff; and the Omahas laughed in their tepees, for the sound of an
enemys wailing is sweet. The sweltering suns of the prairie September
beat upon the bare summit where the village pined, and the lips of the
Poncas burned with thirst, while their eyes drank of the copious floods
far below them.

So it chanced one day, when a cry went up through the village: Our
children are dying of thirst; let us beg mercy of our enemies! that an
unarmed brave passed out of the village and across the valley toward
the camp of his foes. With tottering step he approached the tepee
before which Big Axe waited. His lips were swollen and cracked; his
eyes were bleared and sunken, yet they glared as the eyes of a wolf
from the darkness of a cavern.

In a hoarse, inarticulate whisper he spoke to the chief: Pity my
people, for they are dying of thirst!

There was lightning in the eyes of Muzape Tunga. Badger! he hissed;
and he struck the suppliant down before him.

The sun burned down the glaring blue of the west. A continuous wail
arose from the suffering village like the cry of pines in a gentle
wind; while from the tepees of the besiegers came the sound of merry
laughter that mocked like the babble of inaccessible waters.

But when the red sun touched the tops of the far hills, another form
left the enclosure of the village and took its way down the hillside.
As it came nearer, a hush of awe fell upon the Omahas. The form was
that of a squaw! With an unfaltering movement she approached, seeming
to hover through the mist that arose from the valley. Slowly she
climbed the hillside. Not a sound passed the lips of the beholders.
They seemed the figures of one dream gazing at the central idea of
another. The form emerged from the mist and stood, swathed in the
chromatic radiance of the evening before the motionless figure of
Muzape Tunga. The eyes of the woman and the chief met in unwavering
stare. Had the glance of the former become vocal, it would have been
a song with the softness of the mothers lullaby, but with a meaning
terrible as the battle cry of a brave.

With a langorous movement the woman raised her arms, thus allowing
the many-coloured skin that hung about her shoulders to slip to the
ground, exposing all the dumb eloquence of her brown breasts. Out of
the silence her voice broke like the voice of a sudden wind that rises
in the night.

Nunda Nu [Man-Heart] fears not Muzape Tunga!

The chief saw the lithe young form, heard the soft, caressing voice and
shivered with great passion.

A swift smile crossed the face of the young woman, soft as a last ray
of sunlight on a hill. Again the voice grew out of the hush.

The heart of Muzape Tunga is strong like his arm and kind like his
eye; he will spare my people.

The chiefs great breast heaved with the pleasure of his eye and ear.
Nunda Nu has the heart of a man and the eye of a woman, he said; her
voice is soft like the song of a forest stream; Muzape Tunga spares her
people.

Nunda Nu turned her face to her village and made a signal with her
uplifted hands. Soon an unarmed Ponca, manifestly a chief by his
garments, was seen taking his way down the hillside.

Come! said Nunda Nu, turning to Big Axe; my father bears the pipe of
peace; let us meet him in the valley.

Without a word the chief followed the young woman, while his warriors
stared after in wonderment. In the valley, midway between the village
and the camp, the chiefs met. Then both sitting cross-legged upon the
grass, the Ponca lit the pipe of peace, and having puffed silently for
a while, handed it to his conqueror. The sweet smoke of the red willow
arose slowly over the silent three, and Big Axe stared abstractedly
into the mounting vapour. The evening grew old. The sunlight left the
summits of the hills and the shadows deepened. Still Big Axe did not
speak, but gazed with wide eyes into the ascending cloud of smoke. The
heart of the terrible warrior had grown tender; a light softer than the
twilight was in his eye. It seemed that he could hear the slumberous,
singing voice of a squaw and the prattle of children about the door of
his lodge. There were pictures for him in the rising smoke.

Suddenly he took the pipe from his mouth and returned it to the Ponca
chief.

We will bury the tomahawk, he said; our ponies shall sweat no more
in the battle, but in the paths of the bison. No more shall our faces
be cruel with warpaint.

Again there was silence but for the rhythmic puffing of the Poncas
pipe. Again Muzape Tunga spoke, and his voice was sonorous with passion.

The eyes of Nunda Nu are deep and dark as a mountain lake; her voice
is a song that the slow winds sing in the willows. Give me Nunda Nu
that my lodge may be filled with laughter; give her to Muzape Tunga
that peace may be everlasting between us!

There was a silence. The Ponca forgot his pipe; he puffed deliberately
and at long intervals. The ascending smoke dwindled to a thin grey
thread. With steadfast gaze the smoker looked before him into the
darkness, for his thoughts were deep.

At length he laid the pipe upon the grass and arose to his feet,
extending his hand to Big Axe. His voice was tremulous as he spoke.

Muzape Tunga asks a great thing of his conquered brother; had he asked
for a hundred ponies, with feet fleet as the winds in winter, his
brother would have laughed at the little gift. Nunda Nu is my life; I
give my life to my brother.

Already the night had spread into the west and the darkness hid their
parting.

       *       *       *       *       *

Some days afterward at sunset, an Omaha maiden stood upon a hill near
her village. With hand at brow she peered into the blue distance.
Suddenly a cry of delight trembled on her lips. A cloud of dust had
grown far away upon the verge of a hill to the northeast, slowly
resolving itself into a long line of warriors approaching at a gallop.
The column drew nearer. The face of the watching maiden grew darker
with anxiety, as a brilliant cloud darkens when the twilight fails. She
beheld the masterful form of Big Axe mounted upon a black pony, riding
in advance of the band; yet her face darkened. Her brows lowered with
the strain of her intense gaze. Was it a squaw that rode upon a pony
white as a summer cloud beside her warrior?

A shout went up from the village below. The speed of the ponies was
increased to a fast gallop; the band swept up the valley. A strange
low cry fell from the lips of the maiden; a stifled cry like that of
a sleeping brave who feels the knife of the treacherous foeman at his
heart.

In the village was the sound of many glad voices; but in the darkness
of the hill above, a frail form buried its face in the dry bunch grass
and uttered a moan that no one heard.

       *       *       *       *       *

The autumn passed: the cold winds came down from the north, shaking the
snow from their black wings, and the people of the village began to
look upon Shadow Flower with awe. For never a word had she spoken to
anyone since the returning of the band in the fall. With a dull light
in her eyes she wandered about muttering to herself: It was summer
when they left; now the prairie is so cold and white, so cold and
white.

Absent-mindedly she would dwell upon the bitter words, gazing beneath
an arched hand into the cold, white glare of the horizon. Then her
eyes, at times, would blaze with gladness. Shonga saba! Shonga saba!
(a black pony) she would cry ecstatically; and for one intense moment
her frail form would be erect and quivering with joy. Then the light
in her eye would fade as the fires fade in a camp that is deserted; a
cry of anguish would fall from her lips, her hand would drop lifelessly
from her brow. No, she would sigh languidly; no, it is only a cloud!
O, the prairie is so cold and white, so cold and white!

And the old people shook their heads and whispered to each other:
The soul of Pazha Hu has followed the summer, for her soul loved the
flowers; can you not hear her body crying for her soul?

When the warm winds came again and the hills were green, the crying of
a young child was heard in the lodge of Muzape Tunga. The simple heart
of the stern warrior throbbed with gladness as a cold seed throbs with
the blowing of the south wind.

But the sound of the infants voice brought no summer to the heart of
Nunda Nu. The touch of its little brown hands stung her breasts, and as
she looked upon its face, placid or expressive as its dreams took form
or slept, a cold shudder ran through her veins as when one gazes on a
snake, for it was the child of an enemy.

All through the long winter a slow hate had sapped the kindness
from the heart of the future mother; and when she felt the new life
throbbing into form, her thoughts grew bitter. So now the unforgotten
moaning of the children of her people, dying with thirst upon the
barren summit, was loud enough to drown the prattle of her enemys
child, which should have wrought enchantment in her blood.

One night a noiseless shadow passed among the tepees hushed in slumber
beneath the moonlight. It crept up to the tepee of Muzape Tunga and
crouched beside it in an attitude of listening. The bugs chirped and
hummed, the frogs croaked, the wolves howled far away; save these and a
sleepers heavy breathing, there was silence.

Suddenly there was a faint sound as of someone moving in the tepee;
the shadow outside arose and the moonlight fell upon its haggard face,
the face of Shadow Flower. She placed her eye to a small opening in
the skins that covered the poles. Now she would gaze upon the child of
Muzape Tunga!

Through the opening at the top of the tepee the moonlight entered with
intense brilliance and fell upon three faces. One was the face of her
once sweet dream and the face that trembled through the visions of her
madness, Muzape Tungas. One was the beautiful, cruel face of her who
came upon a pony white as a summer cloud that autumn evening when the
sunlight left the prairie. One was a face that she had not seen before,
yet her poor heart ached as she looked upon it. It was the face of his
child, her child. Ah, it should have been the child of Shadow Flower,
she thought, and her brain reeled with sudden madness.

As she looked, the woman in the tepee raised herself upon her elbow.
She gazed upon the peaceful face of Big Axe. The moon lit up her
features in clear relief. Her eyes were terrible with hate; the lids
drawn closely about them until they had the small beady appearance of
the snakes. Her lips were drawn closely cross her white teeth in a
cold grin. Her form trembled as with a chill, yet the night was warm.
Then she arose, and with a noiseless step, sought for something that
hung upon the side of the tepee. She returned clutching a tomahawk. The
light caught her whole form, making it stand out, clear-cut like a
statue, the statue of a prairie Judith.

Then she bent over the sleeping Muzape Tunga for one moment. There was
a dull sound as the weapon entered the sleepers skull; but more than
this there was no sound, no groan. And the one who stood like a shadow
without the tepee was stricken dumb with fright.

The woman within turned to the sleeping child and raised the dripping
tomahawk; but her arm seemed to freeze in act to strike, and the blow
did not fall. A strange soft light crept over the face of the woman.
She lowered her arm and laid the weapon aside. Then with the step of a
wild-cat she crept to the entrance of the tepee and, gazing cautiously
about for a moment, slipped silently into the haze of the moonlight,
and was engulfed in the darkness of the valley.

As the dim outline of the fleeing squaw mixed itself with the uncertain
haze and vanished, a great happiness leaped into the stagnant veins of
Shadow Flower, and her blood rushed like a stream when the ice melts
with the breath of the south wind.

Even the thought that Big Axe lay dead within the tepee did not quell
her happiness, for she said to herself: Now Pazha Hu shall have her
warrior; he shall be all hers.

She crept into the tepee and, kneeling, put her lips to the chilling
lips of Big Axe. He did not breathe. She placed her arms about his
body, her face against his breast, yet he did not move. He lay quietly
with the intense moonlight upon his face. She did not sob, she was
almost happy; for did she not at last possess that for which she had
pined?

Her musings were broken by the crying of the child. She took it in her
arms and held it to her breast, humming a low lullaby, half-persuaded
that the child was her own. But the child was frightened by the strange
voice and cried piteously. Then Shadow Flower thought, It cries for
its father, yet its father has gone. Hush! she said to the child;
we will go and find the soul of Muzape Tunga; it cannot be far away.

She wrapped a blanket about the infant, muffling its cries, and tied
it about her shoulders. Then she went silently through the village and
out into the open prairie, weird with the blue haze of the moon and the
lonesome cries of the wolves.

A rabbit hopped past and stopped near her as if gazing at the maiden.

O Rabbit! cried Shadow Flower, tell me, have you seen the soul of
Muzape Tunga?

The rabbit, awed by the strangeness of the voice, moved its long ears;
then it hopped away into the shades. The maiden followed and was
swallowed in the moonlit mist.

       *       *       *       *       *

When the sun looked into the village, the women were stricken with
terror and the men with anger. The wise people shook their heads by
which to say: Ah, yes; we thought such things of Nunda Nu.

The days passed; the moons came and went; yet Shadow Flower did not
return. There was a common thought concerning her disappearance which
was never spoken aloud; but when the fires burned low and the night
grew late, it was often whispered with awe:

She has gone in search of her soul; it fled last year with the
summer.




VI

THE ART OF HATE


MANY tales have been told of noble sacrifice for love, and I have seen
such in my time; but I have in mind an instance in which a man reached
a sublime height through the least exalted of human passionshate.

There are some who argue that love is born at first sight. However that
be, I am certain that it is often thus with hate. I have seen men in my
time the first sight of whom was an insult to mesudden, stinging like
a slap on the cheek. It is a strange thing, and I have never heard it
explained satisfactorily. Sometimes in my own case I have attributed
it to even so slight a thing as a certain turn of the nose, a curve
of the lip, a droop of the eye. And again I have felt that it was due
to nothing visible about the man, but rather to some subtle emanation
from the very soul of him, that maddened me as though I had inhaled the
fumes of some devilish drug. Have you ever felt this?

Well, I am telling you about Zephyr Recontre.

He was a little, wiry half-breed, with a French father and a woman of
the Blackfeet tribe for a mother. Quite a promising combination, if you
think it over! I came across him way up at Fort Union in the early
30s, when I was in charge of a keel boat of the American Fur Company.
He was employed at the Fort as interpreter, being a fluent speaker of
several Indian tongues as well as English and French.

His forehead was a narrow strip of brown between his wiry black hair
and the continuous streak of black that was his eyebrows. His eyes were
large and black and quiet. His cheek bones were prominent and his jaw
was so heavy as to throw his whole face out of balance, as you might
say. The face of a stayer, you know. Never said much except as his
duties demanded, and then he went straight to the point with a quiet
directness that left little need for a question.

Superb little animal he was, too; had the maximum strength with the
minimum weight, and a cool head to run it with. I never saw him
impelled by sudden anger except once, and that is where the story
begins.

In the spring of 39 I took charge of the steamboat _Yellowstone_, as
captain. We were loaded with supplies for the American Fur Companys
posts on the upper Missouri, and carried a number of _engags_ of the
Company, and a certain Frenchman, Jules Latour, who had been appointed
_bourgeois_ of the old Fort Union, and was going up to take charge.

If there ever was an emperor in this country it was J. J. Astor, the
head of the Company at that time, and his empire was spread pretty
much all over the white space on the map of the West as it stood then.
The _bourgeois_, masters of the trading posts, were the proconsuls, and
they acted the part.

The _engags_, humble servants of the empire, were as dogs about the
feet of these Western princes, who stalked through their provinces,
mountain-high in aristocratic aloofness.

Latour outprinced princeliness. He felt his dignity and dressed it; his
presence on the boat was like a continual blowing of trumpets going
before a conqueror. A capital I swaggering in broadcloththat was
Latour!

Recontre was going back with us, having dropped down to St. Louis the
fall before on Company business. I happened to be near when master and
man first met on the forward deck. They stared upon each other for only
a moment; but there were years of hate condensed in that bit of time,
the master casting a contemptuous glance from beneath lids scornfully
drooped, and the servant meeting this with a sudden glare of black fire.

Not a word was passed; Recontre made no sign of obeisance, passing on
with a sullen swing, his jaws set firmly, his eyes brilliant as with a
smouldering fire blown by a gusty wind into a baleful glow.

It was a plain case of hate at first sight. A week later, after we
had passed St. Marys, I was standing on the hurricane deck, gazing
downstream where the colours of a quiet sunset swept the waters. I
heard an angry snarl below me, and looking down, I saw Recontre lift
the struggling Latour in his arms and hurl him into the river.

I immediately stopped the boat and ordered a crew to man the yawl and
rescue Latour, at the same time having Recontre seized.

Latour came aboard coughing and spitting, a most ludicrous object.
But to my surprise, he immediately commanded that Recontre should be
released. I wondered much at this at the time; but ten years later I
had a talk with Recontre, which threw some light on the subject. He was
leaving the country, and, as we had become close friends, he did not
hesitate to tell me what he had kept a close secret for years.

We were taking a friendly glass together at a St. Louis bar, when I
purposely brought up the name of Jules Latour, who had starved to death
some years before in a mackinaw boat that got caught in the ice far up
the river. I had heard stories of how Recontre, who was with Latour on
the trip, had shown a faithfulness to his master equalled only by the
faithfulness of a dog to a man. This had always seemed strange to me,
and so I brought up Jules Latour.

At the sound of the name I saw the black fire grow up in my companions
eyes, just as I had seen it ten years before on the forward deck of the
_Yellowstone_.

You got that story, too, did you? he said dreamily, staring straight
ahead of him as into a great distance. Well, its all over now, and
for the first time, I am going to tell the truth about the death of
Latour and my great faithfulness. When I first saw that man, I felt as
though he had struck me between the eyes with his white fist. I hated
him as I had never hated before, and as I hope never to hate again. It
hurts to hate; it eats into a man like some incurable blood disease.

You saw me throw him into the water. I can hardly explain why I did
that; only, the man spoke to me in a way that insulted me more than
if he had blackguarded my mother. It wasnt in the words, for I have
forgotten what he said.

We hated each other. I knew how much I hated, but I did not know how
great was his hate until he smilingly ordered my release. I knew then
that his hate was a great hatestronger than love can be. And also I
knew that this hate would grow until one of us was killed. And it did.

What! said I; did _you_ kill Latour?

Recontre smiled one of his enigmatic smiles and said quietly: _Nature_
killed Latour; _I_ merely helped Nature!

And then he laughed softly, while the black fire grew again in his eyes.

Recontre led the way to a table in the back of the room and we sat
down, when he began talking rapidly, never hesitating in his story, and
seeming, at times, wholly unconscious of my presence.

When we arrived at Fort Union, said he, no one could have guessed
the hate that we nursed for each other. Being a new man in the country,
Latour consulted me upon many phases of the business, and we were much
together. The whole post considered me a most favoured person; little
knowing, as I did, that hate can bind two persons as closely as love.

My hatred for the man made his a most fascinating personality to me;
and I often found him studying my face with a diabolical fondness.

Latour heaped favours upon me, and I received them with a strange
gladness of heart that even now I cannot explain. One day in November
he sent for me to come to his office. I found him in a mood seemingly
most agreeable. His face beamed with a light that any other would have
taken for kindness. I saw in it only the ecstatic anticipation of
triumph. And when he spoke I knew that I was right.

My dear Recontre, said he, it seems that I am forced to fall back
upon you for everything. I have a difficult task on hand, and you are
the one man to perform it; I know of no other so peculiarly fitted
for it. I shall carefully lay before you the dangers of the mission I
have in mind, leaving you free to consent or refuse just as you see
fit. Perhaps the undertaking is impossible. It may be that no man is
sufficiently equipped with strength and daring to do what I wish. You
shall decide.

You see he imagined that he was wheedling me through my vanity. He
then stated that he wished to open trade with the Blackfeet tribe.
He drew strongly upon his imagination to explain the great dangers in
store for him who should undertake the task. The Blackfeet were at that
time deadly enemies of the whites. They had killed and mutilated a
number of traders. I would of course stand a poor chance of coming back
alive. He was convinced of that.

Will you go, Recontre? said he, staring steadily into my eyes.

I was dumbfounded at the audacity of the man. I saw the light of doubt
wavering in his eyes; but I did not wish to flinch before my enemy.

Certainly, said I; and I will go alone!

I saw the triumph glisten in his eye.

Very well, said he; you may start in the morning. Make your own
arrangements. I give you full power to transact the business in hand as
your wisdom may dictate.

And I started in the morning. Two weeks later I returned, successful
beyond all hope. I not only brought back a band of the leading men of
the tribe for a council, but I brought also a young woman for my wife.
I called her Pelagie after one of my sisters.

As I think of it now it seems miraculous that I succeeded. I am half
convinced that I was inspired from out the profundity of my hate to do
and say the right things.

Latour played skilfully the part of gratitude and joy, but I saw,
nevertheless, the deep, devilish disappointment that he felt. And I was
very glad, for I had conquered in this first combat; and also Pelagie
was a pleasant woman.

As the winter deepened, Latour and I became more and more inseparable.
We outdid each other in acts of seeming kindness, until all the post
was jealous of my intimacy with the master.

They little guessed how we played a ghastly game that would be
finished only when one of us could smirk and flatter no more.

The winter grew bitter; heavy snows fell. And I wondered much what
great honour Latour would heap upon me next, seeing that I was so
capable and willing. Near Christmas Latour called me to his office, and
the light of anticipated triumph was upon his face.

My friend, said he; I do not wish to impose upon you, but I have
in mind a great service that you may render me, as a friend, mind you,
Recontre. I am sure that you will succeed unless you freeze to death or
get killed by the Indians. None but a brave man would attempt what I
shall mention. I have a very important communication to forward to the
office at St. Louis. It must be there before the middle of March or the
Company will suffer heavy losses. If you can get this there at the time
stated, you shall be advanced considerably, with a raise of wages. Now
how would you like being my private clerk?

I stared into Latours eyes and saw all hell deep down in them.

Give me a good dog to carry my bedding, said I, and I will be at
St. Louis by the middle of March, and then I thanked him extravagantly
for this last and greatest of favours. All the time I hated the man
more pitilessly than ever before because of his shallowness in hoping
to flatter me into getting myself frozen to death.

I started the next day with 1700 miles of frozen prairie before me. I
felt a strange joy at the thought of my hardships. Once again I would
have the joy of seeing disappointment in the eyes of my enemy, and
my soul could laugh again. I say I was glad to go, even though I was
obliged to leave Pelagie behind at a time when the post was ravaged
with the smallpox.

It was a trip to make one love hell by comparison. Nothing but my hate
sustained me. On March 10th I delivered the written message to the
official at St. Louis. He read it wonderingly.

What! said he; have you walked from Union to deliver _this_?

I stated that I had and he shook his head, frowned and dismissed me. I
never knew what was in that message. I surmise that it was nothing of
much importance.

When the first boat started up the river for the North I went with
it and arrived at Fort Union in late June. Latour was at the landing
when the boat pulled in. He threw his arms about my neck and actually
kissed me upon the cheek. He then and there made me his private clerk
with my former salary doubled. He treated me as a brother.

But I saw in the depth of his eyes the soul-fret of a wounded beast.

When we reached his office walking arm in arm, he gently told me of
the serious sickness of Pelagie, and how he had looked after her like a
brother through the hard winter.

I hurried to my home. I found Pelagie delirious with the fever of
smallpox. All that night I sat beside her, my heart aching, for I felt
that she would die.

And for the time I forgot my hate for Latour, until, in her feverish
tossing about, she threw her bare arm over the side of the bed. Then
I saw that which made me shiver with a desire to kill. There was a
scratch on the arm, and the flesh about it was swollen and blue. It
came to me that Latour had caused her to be inoculated that she might
die before my return, and thus make my heart sore that he might see.

I grasped the dirk and ran wildly out of the house in search of
Latour. I reached his door. Then I faltered. It was not fear that made
me falter. It was that I knew my revenge could not be completed in this
way. I wanted to see him suffer more than I had ever suffered. Also I
wished to come away with clean hands. I did not know how it could be
done then, but I trusted to some mysterious power that had seemed to be
with me all through my terrible winter tramp.

I stole back to the bedside of Pelagie. She died at dawn.

Latour mourned with me. He wept and spoke touchingly of his own wife.
I gritted my teeth and strained every nerve to keep from choking him.

The summer passed. Latour was so kind that I often found it an effort
to keep alive my belief in his treachery. And at other times, I was
obliged to leave him abruptly, feeling a madness in my blood for
striking him down, trampling him, tearing him with my teeth and nails.

Oh, all the great actors have not appeared upon the stage! I must
confess that Nature and Zephyr Recontre killed a great actor!

The fall came, and our friendship did not abate. I began to fear that
my chance would never come, and I would be obliged to kill him as one
brute kills another. Many nights I lay awake shaping impossible schemes
of revenge that were rejected in the sanity of the morning.

In the first week of October I had occasion for a great joy. Latour
called me to his office and stated that certain conditions of the trade
which had been wholly unforeseen, made it necessary that he should
be in St. Louis before the winter set in. Unfortunately, the last
steamboat had left Fort Union for the South, making it necessary that
the trip be made in a mackinaw boat. Would I, his dearest friend,
consent to accompany him on the trip?

With a studied reluctance that hid my insane joy, I consented. Latour
left a clerk in charge of affairs, and we started. We made very slow
progress, as we depended almost entirely upon the current, having no
oars, and there being little wind to fill the square sail we carried.

This was as I wished it to be. I kept longing for the ice to come down
and shut us in. Time and again I managed to run the boat aground on
bars in order to kill time. Latour seemed not to notice this. In fact,
he was unusually pleasant in his bearing toward me.

We had a small hut built on the mackinaw, fitted with two bunks, and a
small box stove for cooking. When we tied up to the shore for the night
and turned in, I was often obliged to choke back laughter at the comedy
that we playeda grim comedy. Each of us would at once feign deep
slumber, ever now and then opening our eyes to see how the other slept.
Once our eyes chanced to meet in the dim candle light of the room, for
Latour insisted upon the candle. We both grinned and rolled over.

Our understanding seemed perfect; and yet, owing to the devilish
refinement of our mutual hate, neither really feared any vulgar act of
violence from the other. We knew that the thing would not be done in
that way.

We had made about five hundred miles down stream into the very heart
of the wilderness, when the ice began running. Within twenty-four hours
after that, we were frozen in. A heavy snow began falling and continued
for a week. It lay three feet deep upon the level, and was so light as
to make it impossible to take the trail.

Latour and I merrily set about to chop wood, not knowing how long we
might be forced to live in the little cabin of the mackinaw.

We had brought only about half enough provisions for the trip, having
depended upon hunting for much of our food, as there was a great deal
of game in those days. The deep snow made it impossible to get much
game, so that in less than two weeks our little supply of lyed corn was
almost exhausted.

One morning Latour said that he was sick, and remained in his bunk. At
first I looked upon this with suspicion, thinking that he thus sought
to throw the duties of seeking game wholly upon me, who had proved
myself so capable and willing. But the next morning I knew it was no
sham, for he had a high fever, and was delirious at times. You see, he
had been used to luxury, and his feeble constitution had not been equal
to the thorough soaking we got while chopping wood in the deep snow.

Often in his delirium he linked my name with bitter curses. At last
he had betrayed his hate, and I smiled, knowing that he would lose the
game at last, since he no longer had the cunning to continue it.

Again it began to snow; it was a hard winter. Much as I might have
wished to seek game for my sick enemy, I could not even seek it for
myself. Nature had taken a hand in the game; I began to feel her
master-touch in the bitter scheme of things. She seemed determined to
starve us both; but I knew that I could last longer than Latour with
his constitution weakened by too much easy life.

So I blessed the snow as it deepened. Latour would die before my eyes;
and then afterward I too would die, the winner of the game. It would
be a most sublime revenge, it seemed to me; for I think I was hardly
sane when I was near Jules Latour. It would be like Samson crushing his
enemies and himself together. No one could blame me, should our bodies
be found. I would have had my revenge and still none could blame me.

There was a small quantity of lyed corn left. I ate sparingly of this,
carefully saving Latours share for him when he should wish to eat.

One morning he awoke from his delirium; he asked for food.

I have saved your share for you, said I. I might have eaten it, for
I think we shall starve to death in a week or so. The snow is too deep
and soft for hunting. Still I have divided fair with you, remembering
your great kindness to Pelagie, remembering your great kindness in
allowing me to distinguish myself among the Blackfeet, remembering your
generosity in allowing me to take your message to St. Louis. Do you
remember?

He groaned, and his eyes became cold and savage, like a starved wolfs.

I gave him his lyed corn and he ate. His delirium returned. He cursed
Recontre bitterly. He clenched his feverish, white hands about the
imaginary neck of Zephyr Recontre; and I smiled.

In two days more all the lyed corn had been eaten. In the meanwhile
the surface of the snow had hardened with the intense cold. I could
have hunted, for I was not yet too weak, and there was a gun and
plenty of ammunition. But I did not go hunting. I saw Latour weakening
rapidly. He might die during my absence, and I would thus lose the
sweetness of my revenge. It seemed to me that this would be like
selling my birthright for a mess of pottage.

I could have taken the gun and gone south over the snow to Fort
Pierre, several hundred miles down the river. But I did not go. Latour
had not died yet After he died, if I could still walk, I might go.

All day I sat beside the little box stove, gazing upon Latour. At
night I slept lightly, awakening often to see how fever and hunger
dealt with Latour. He might die while I slept.

One day in December, I cannot remember just when, for I myself was
often delirious with hunger, Latour again awakened from delirium.

Food, food! he gasped. For Gods sake, Recontre, dont let a man
starve like this! Lets make it up between us; only give me something
to eat!

His voice was thin like a sick womans. His face was the face of a
damned man.

Make what up? I said sweetly. My voice was also thin. I struggled
continuously with a terrible giddiness. I felt as one in a nightmare.
I, too, was starving.

Latour stared upon me with tears in his faded eyes, and groaned. I,
too, fetched tears; it was easy to weep in my weakened condition.

I have no food, said I; neither can I go in search of any. I am
starving, and the snow is deep. Would I not go if I could? Would I not
go for _you?_ Can I forget Pelagie and the Blackfeet trip? Can I forget
the winter trip to St. Louis?

Latour fainted. I shouted feebly with an insane joy; I thought he had
died.

In a few moments he revived, and again begged piteously for food. I
wept, and said there was none. Then he became delirious and cursed me
like a devil. I never heard such cursing before nor since.

And the strange thing about it all was that I pitied Latour. But my
hate had become a mania; I could not relent.

What passed after that hour I cannot remember with distinctness.
Dreams were real, and reality was a dream. I only remember in a vague
way, as though it had happened in a nightmare, that Latour died cursing
me; that I sang and shouted; that I crawled out of the hut on my hands
and knees, laughing and shouting, and that I saw a band of men coming
over the frozen snow from the direction of Fort Pierre. I remember
hearing them call my name as with the voices of a dream. I remember
that I cried out, Latour has just died! And then I remember laughing
and crying, not knowing why I did.

I remember that these men gave me foodwarm foodand that after a long
sleep I awoke and saw a Jesuit missionary kneeling at my bedside.

It was then that I tasted the full sweetness of my triumph. The priest
was _blessing me!_ He spoke of the Christlike kindness of Zephyr
Recontre, who had not deserted his sick master.

I did not see Latour again. The Jesuits party had chopped a hole in
the ice and had given his body to the river.




VII

THE SINGER OF THE ACHE

_The Old Omaha Speaks_


NOW this is the story of one who walked not with his people, but with a
dream.

To you I tell it, O White Brother, yet is it not for you, unless you
also have followed the long trail of hunger and thirstthe trail that
leads to no lodge upon the high places or the low places, by flowing
streams or where the sand wastes lie.

It shall be as the talking of a strange tribe to you, unless you also
have peered down the endless trail, with eyes that ached and dried up
as dust, and felt your pony growing leaner and shadow-thin beneath
you as you rode, until at last you sat upon a quiet heap of bones and
peered and peered ahead.

Moon-Walker was he calledhe who walked for the moon. But that was
after he had called his pony from the grazing places and mounted for
the long ride. Yet was there a time when he ran about among the lodges
laughing very merrily with many boys and girls, who played with hoop
and spear, made little bloodless wars upon unseen peoples, and played
in little ways the big, sad games of men. And then he was called by
many names, and all of the names, though different, meant that he was
happy.

But once his mother and his father saw how that a man began to look out
of his eyes, began to hear a man talking in his throat; and so they
said: It is the time for him to dream.

So they sent him at nightfall to the hill of dreamsas is the custom of
our people.

_Wahoo!_ the bitter hill of dreams! Many have I seen go up there
laughing, but always they came down with halting feet and with sadness
in their faces. And among these many, lo! even I who speaktherefore
should my words be heard.

And he of the many names went up into the hill of dreams and dreamed.
And in through the mists that strange winds blow over the hills of
sleep burst a white light, as though the moon had grown so big that
all the sky was filled from rim to rim, leaving no place for sun and
stars. And upon the surface of the white light floated a face, an awful
facewhiter than the light upon which it floated; and so beautiful to
see that he of the many happy names ached through all his limbs, and
cried out and woke. Then leaping to his feet, he gazed about, and all
the stars had grown so small that he looked thrice and hard before he
saw them; and the world was shrunken.

And frightened at the strangeness of all things, he fled down the
hillside into the village. His mother and his father he wakened with
bitter crying.

How came the dream? they whispered; for upon the face of him who went
up a boy they saw that which only many years should bring; and in his
eyes there was a strange light.

A face! a face! he whispered. I saw the face of the Woman of the
Moon! Whiter than snow, it was, and over it a pale flame went! Oh,
never have I seen so fair a face; and there was something hidden in it
swift as lightning; something that would be thunder if it spoke; and
also there was something kind as rain that falls upon a place of aching
heat. Into the north it looked, high up to where the lonesome star
hangs patient.

And there was a dazzle of white breasts beneath, half-hidden in a
thin blanket of mist. And on her head, big drifts of yellow hair; not
hanging loose as does your hair, O mother, but heaped like clouds that
burn above the sunset. My breast aches for something I cannot name. And
now I think that I can never play again!

And there was a shaking of heads in that lodge, and a wondering, for
this was not good. Not so had others, big in deeds, dreamed upon the
hill in former times. Always there had been a coming of bird, or beast,
or reptile, wrapped in the mystery of strange words; or there had been
the cries of fighting men, riding upon a hissing of hot breaths; or
there had been a stamping of ponies, or the thin, mad song of arrows.

But here it was not so, and the mother said:

Many times the false dreams come at first, and then at last the true
one comes. May it not be so with him?

And the father said: It may be so with him.

So once again up the hill of dreams went the boy. And because of the
words of his father and mother, he wept and smeared his face with dust;
his muddy hands he lifted to the stars. And he raised an earnest voice:
O Wakunda! send me a mans dream, for I wish to be a big man in my
village, strong to fight and hunt. The womans face is good to see,
but I cannot laugh for the memory of it. And there is an aching in my
breast. O Wakunda! send me the dream of a man!

       *       *       *       *       *

And he slept. And in the middle of the night, when shapeless things
come up out of the hills, and beasts and birds talk together with the
tongues of men, his dream came back.

Even as before the moon-face floated in a lake of cold white firea
lake that drowned the stars. And as he reached to push it from him, lo!
like a white stem growing downward from a flower, a body grew beneath
it! And there was a flashing of white lightning, and the Woman of the
Moon stood before him.

Then was there a burning in the blood of the boy, as she stooped with
arms held wide; and he was wrapped about as with a white fire, through
which the face grew down with lips that burned his lips as they
touched, and sent pale lightnings flashing through him.

And as the dream woman turned to run swiftly back up the star-trails he
who dreamed reached out his arms and clutched at the garments of light
that he might hold the thing that fled, for dearer than life it seemed
to him now.

And he woke. His face was in the dust. His clutching hands were full of
dust.

_Wahoo!_ the bitter hill of dreams! Have you climbed it, O White
Brother, even as I?

And in the morning he told the dream to his father, who frowned; to his
motherand she wept. And they said: This is not a warriors dream, nor
is it the dream of a Holy Man; nor yet is it the vision of a mighty
bison hunter. Some strange new trail this boy shall followa cloudy,
cloudy trail! Yet let him go a third time to the hillmay not the true
dream linger?

And the boy went up again; his step was light; his heart sang wildly in
his breast. For once again he wished to see the Woman of the Moon.

But no dream came. And in the morning the pinch of grief was upon his
face and he shook his fists at the laughing Day. Then did he and a
great Ache walk down the hill together. All things were little and
nothing good to see. And in among his people he went, staring with eyes
that burned as with a fever, and lo! he was a stranger walking there!
Only the Dream walked with him.

And the sunlight burned the blue, much-beaded tepee of the sky, and
left it black; and as it burned and blackened, burned and blackened,
he who dreamed the strange dream found no pleasure in the ways of men.
Only in gazing upon the round moon did he find pleasure. And when even
this was hidden from him for many nights and days he went about with
drooping head, and an ache was in his eyes.

And in these days he made wild songs; for never do the happy ones make
songsthey only sing them. Songs that none had heard he made. Not such
as toilers make to shout about the camp fires when the meat goes round.
Yet was the thick, hot dust of weary trails blown through them, and
cries of dying warriors, and shrieks of widowed women, and whimpering
of sick _zhinga zhingas_; and also there was in them the pang of big
man-hearts, the ache of toiling womens backs, the hunger, the thirst,
the wish to live, the fear to die!

So the people said: Who is this _nu zhinga_ who sings of trails he
never followed, of battles he never fought? No father is heand yet he
sings as one who has lost a son! Of the pain of love he singsyet never
has he looked upon a girl!

And it was the way of the boy to answer: I seek what I do not find,
and so I sing!

And the nights and days made summers and winters, and thus it was with
the Singer of the Ache. He grew tall even to the height of a manyet
was he no man. For little did he care to hunt, and the love of battles
was not his. Nor his the laughter of the feast fires. Nor did he look
upon the face of any maiden with soft eyes.

And the father and mother, who felt the first frosts upon their heads,
said: Our son is now a man; should he not build a lodge and fill it
with a woman? Should we not hear the laughter of _zhinga zhingas_ once
again before we take the black trail together?

And because his father had many ponies, many maidens were brought
before him for his choosing. But he looked coldly upon them and he
said: The stars are my sisters and my brothers, and the Moon is my
wife, giving me songs for children. Soon shall there be a long trail
for me.

Thereat a cry went up against him and more and more he walked a
stranger. Only the Dream walked with him; and he sang the songs that
ache.

Harsh words the father spoke: Does the tribe need songs? Can hungry
people eat a silly shout, or will enemies be conquered with a singing?

But the mother wept and said: Say not so of him. Do not his songs
bring tears, so strange and sweet they are at times? Does a man quarrel
with the vessel from which he drinks sweet waters, even if it be broken
and useless for the cooking?

And the father frowned and said: Give me many laughers, and I will
conquer all the enemies and fill all the kettles of the feasts! Let the
weepers and makers of tears drag wood with the women. Always have I
been a fighter of battles and a killer of bison. This is not my son!

And it happened one night that the Singer stood alone in the midst of
his people, when the round Moon raised a shining forehead out of the
dark, and grew big and flooded all the hills with white light. And the
Singer raised his arms to it and sang as one who loves might sing to a
maiden coming forth flashing with many beads from her tepee.

And the people laughed and a mutter ran about: To whom does the fool
sing thus?

Soft, shining eyes he turned upon them, and he said: Even to the Woman
of the Moon! See where she looks into the North with white face raised
to where the lonesome star hangs patient!

And the people said: This is the talk of a foolno woman do we see!

And then the Singer sang a new song through which these words ran
often: Only he sees who canonly he sees who can!

So now he walked a fool among his people, singing the songs that ache.

_Wahoo!_ bitter it is to be a fool! And yet, O White Brother, only they
who have been fools are wise at last!

And it happened one summer that the village was builded in the flat
lands by the Big Smoky Water. And there came snoring up the stream a
_monda geeung_, the magic fire-boat of the palefaces. Up to the shore
it swam, and they who guided it tied it to the sand, for its fires were
hungry and there was much wood in our lands.

And all the villagers gathered there to see the magic swimmer of the
palefaces; and among them came the lonesome singing fool.

And it happened that a woman of the palefaces came forth and stood high
up, and looked upon us, smiling. White as a snowfall in the late spring
was her face, and her hair was like the sun upon a cloud. And we all
stared wide-mouthed upon her, for never before had her kind come into
the prairies.

Also stared the fool. Even long after all the people had gone he
stared; even until the smoky breath of the fire-boat writhed like a big
black serpent out of the place where the stream runs out of the sky.

And then he laid his head upon his knees and wept; for a longing,
bigger than the wish to live, or the fear to die, had come upon him.

Very early in the morning, when the sleep of all things is deepest,
he arose from sleepless blankets. He called his pony from the grazing
places, and he mounted for a long ride. Into the North he rode, and
as he rode he talked to himself and to the silence that clung about
him: It was the Woman of the Moon! Into the North she went, even unto
the quiet place where the lonesome star hangs patient. There shall I
ridethere shall I ride! For there do all my songs take wings and fly;
and there at last their meanings await me. There shall I ridethere
shall I ride!

And the fires of the day burned out the stars and died; downward and
inward rushed the black, black ashes of the night. And still he rode
toward the North.

And like the flashing of a midnight torch through a hole in a tepee
flashed the days and passed. And still he rode.

Through many villages of strange peoples did he ride, and everywhere
strange tongues and strange eyes questioned him; and he answered: Into
the North I ride to find the Woman of the Moon!

And the people pitied him, because he seemed as one whose head was
filled with ghostly things; and they fed him.

Further and further into the waste places he pushed, making the empty
spaces sweet and sad with his singing; and the winter came. Thin and
lean he grew, and his pony grew lean and thin.

And the white, mad spirits of the snow beat about the two. And now and
then snow ghosts writhed up out of the ground and twisted and twirled
and moaned, until they took on the shape of her he sought. And ever he
followed them; and ever they fell back into the ground. And the world
was bitter cold.

_Wahoo!_ the snow ghosts that we follow, O White Brother!

And the time came when the pony was no longer a pony, but a quiet heap
of bones; and upon this sat the man who walked for the moon. Then did
the strength go out of him, and he turned his sharp face to the South.
He sang no more for many days, for his body was as a lodge in which a
fair woman lies dead with no mourners around. And at last he wakened in
a strange lodge in a village of strangers.

       *       *       *       *       *

And it happened when the green things pushed upward into the sun again
that a young man who seemed very old, for he was bent, his face was
thin, his eyes were very big, hobbled back into the village of his
people.

And he went to a lodge which was empty, for the father with his
frowning and the mother with her weeping had taken the long trail, upon
which comes no moon and never the sun risesbut the stars are there.

Many days he lay within the lonesome lodge. And it happened that a
maiden, one whom he had pushed aside in other days, came into the lodge
with meat and water.

So at last he said: I have sought and have not found; therefore will I
be as other men. I will fill this lodge with a womanand this is she.
Henceforth I shall forget the dream that led me; I shall be a hunter of
bison and a killer of enemies; for after all, what else?

And this he did.

So all the village buzzed with kindly words. The fool has come back
wise! they said.

And as the seasons passed there grew the laughter of _zhinga zhingas_
in the lodge of the man who walked no more for the moon.

But a sadness was upon his face. And after a while the dream came back
and brought the singing. Less and less he looked upon the woman and the
children. Less and less he sought the bison, until at last Hunger came
into that lodge and sat beside the fire.

Then again the old cry of the people grew up: The fool still lives! He
sings while his lodge is empty. His woman has become a stranger to him,
and his children are as though a stranger had fathered them! Shall the
fool eat and only sing?

And a snarling cry grew up: Cast out the fool!

And it was done.

So out of the village stumbled the singing fool, and his head was
bloody with the stones the people threw. Very old he seemed, though his
years were not many. Into the North he went, and men saw his face no
more.

But lo! many seasons passed and yet he lived and was among all peoples!
For often on hot dusty trails weary men sat down to sing his songs; and
women, weeping over fallen braves, found his songs upon their lips.
And when the hunger came his strange wild cries went among the people.
And all were comforted!

And this, O White Brother, is the story of the fool who walked for the
moon!




VIII

THE WHITE WAKUNDA


HE was the son of Sky-Walkers oldest squaw and he was born in the time
when the lone goose flies (February). It was a very bitter winter, so
that many years after the old men spoke of it as the winter of the big
snows.

Sky-Walker, his father, was a seer of great visions, and he had a power
that was more than the power of strong arms. He was a thunder man, and
he could make rain.

And when Sky-Walkers oldest squaw bore a son there was much wonder in
the village, for she was far past her summer and the frost had already
fallen on her hair. Also, she was lean and wrinkled.

So the old men and women came to the lodge of Sky-Walker and looked
upon the newborn child. They looked and they shook their heads, for the
child was not as a child should be. He was no bigger than a baby coyote
littered in a terrible winter after a summer of famine. He was not fat.

He can never be a _waschuscha_ [brave], said one old man; I have
seen many _zhinga zhingas_ [babies] who grew strong, but they were not
like this one. He will carry wood and water.

And Sky-Walkers old squaw arose from the blankets where she lay with
the child, and sat up, fixing eyes of bitterness upon those who came to
pity, and she said:

He will be more than a killer of men or a hunter of bison. Wakunda
sent him to me, for I am old and past my time. See, I am lean and
wrinkled, and it is already winter in my hair. Also I had visions. Let
my man tell you; he knows.

And Sky-Walker, sitting beside the old mother, gave words to the old
men and women, who knew his little words to be bigger than the big
words of most men.

The woman speaks true. She is past her time, and she has seen things
that made me wonder, and I am wise. She had visions, but in them there
was no singing of arrows, nor drumming of pony hoofs, nor dancing of
braves in war paint, nor cries of conquered enemies; neither was there
any thunder or lightning.

There was only the soft speaking of quiet thingsthe sound of the
growing of green things under the sun. And before the last moon died,
once she wakened me from my sleeping, for she had had a dream. She saw
her son walking a mighty man among the tribes, yet he had no weapons.

And a great light, greater than sunlight, was about him. This she told
me. Many times have we seen together the drifting of the snows, and
always her words were true words.

And see, it is a boy, even as she dreamed. Also he has come in the
time when the lone goose flies. I see much in this. He shall be alone,
but high in loneliness, and he shall go far, far! Look where he gazes
upon you with man-eyes! Are they the eyes of a _zhinga zhinga_?

The old folks looked and pitied no more, for the eyes were not as other
eyes. They had a strange light, making the old ones wonder.

So the word passed around and around the circle of lodges that
Sky-Walkers oldest squaw had a son who was not a common _zhinga
zhinga_. And as the talk grew, the name of the child grew with it. So
he was called Wa-choo-bay, the Holy One.

And as Wa-choo-bay grew, so grew the wonder of the people, for he never
cried, and he talked soon. Also from the first he appeared as one over
whom many winters had passed.

When he reached that age when he should have played with the other
boys, he did not play, but was much alone upon the prairie without the
village. He never took part in the game of Pawnee _zhay-day_, the game
of spear and hoop, which made the other boys laugh and shout.

One evening in his fifth year, his father, Sky-Walker, said to him:

It is the time for the coming of the dreams to Wa-choo-bay. Let him
go afar into a lonesome place without food and lift his hands and his
voice to Wakunda. Four sleeps let him stay in the lonesome place, that
his dream may come.

So his mother smeared his forehead with mud and muttered to the spirits:

Thus shall you know Wa-choo-bay, who goes forth to have his first
dream. Send him a good dream.

And Wa-choo-bay went forth into a lonesome place without food.

And on the morning of the fifth day, when the squaws were making fires,
he returned, and as he entered the village and went to the lodge of
his father the squaws gazed upon his face, seeing that which was very
strange.

They wakened the sleepers in the lodges, saying:

Wa-choo-bay is come back with a strange medicine-look upon his face!
He has had a great dream; come and see.

And the village awoke and crowded about the lodge of Sky-Walker, who
came forth and said:

Go away! Something great has happened to my _nu-zhinga_ [boy], and he
is about to tell me his dream.

And the people went away, awed and silent.

In the stillness of his lodge Sky-Walker gazed upon the boys face and
said:

What has Wa-choo-bay seen?

And Wa-choo-bay said:

I went far into a lonesome place; there was nothing but the crows and
the prairie and the sky. I lifted my hands and my voice as you told me.
I said the words you told me. Then I slept, and when I awoke this is
what I remembered; the rest was like big things moving in the mist.

I was on the shore of the Ne Shoda [Missouri], and a little canoe
came up to me, and I got in, for a voice told me to get in. Then the
canoe swam out into the water and went fast. I went toward the place of
summer. I rode far, many sleeps, and then as I was about to come to the
end of my long riding, I awoke. Four times I saw this, and then I came
here. What does it mean?

I do not know, said Sky-Walker. I must think hard, and then maybe I
will know.

And Sky-Walker shut himself in his lodge and thought hard for four
sleeps. And when the fifth morning came he said to Wa-choo-bay:

I have thought hard, and now I know that it is the big things moving
in the mist that you must see. Go forth and dream again in the lonesome
place.

And so Wa-choo-bay went forth with the mud on his brow, crying to the
spirits that he might see the big things that moved in the mist. He
slept and dreamed. Again he was in the canoe and he rode far.

Then at last the river tossed him upon the sand, and lo! there was a
big, big village before him, and the lodges of it were strange and very
big. Then the big village wavered like the picture of something in a
pool that is disturbed, and vanished. And the sun was on the hills.

So Wa-choo-bay went back to his father and told him what he had seen,
and Sky-Walker said:

This is very strange. After many sunlights of flowing, the big muddy
water comes to a place where a big new tribe has its lodges. And the
faces of the tribe are white. Something it is about this tribe that you
have dreamed. And I am afraid, for Wakunda meant that all faces should
be of the colour of the earth. Let the sunlight pass, and then we shall
know the meaning of this dream.

The days grew into years, and Wa-choo-bay sat at the feet of the old
men, learning much.

He learned the names of the thunder spirits that are never spoken
aloud. He learned the songs that the thunder spirits love. He learned
to call the rain. He learned the manner of the rite of _Wazhinadee_, by
which one may kill a man without the use of weapons. And when he had
grown to be a tall youth, he was taken into the sacred lodge where the
holy relics are kept. For it seemed plain that Wakunda meant him for a
great medicine-man.

But it was in the summer when he had reached the height of a man that
Wa-choo-bay did that which marked him for the lonesome way.

It happened that the summer had been one of peace and plenty; so the
Omahas called in the Pawnees and the Poncas for a powwow, which is a
great feast and a talking.

And the two neighbouring tribes had taken the peace trail and come
to the Omaha village. Then there was much painting in the colours of
peace, and the village that the three tribes made was more than one
could see with a look.

In a great circle it lay in the flat lands of Ne Shoda, with an opening
to the place of morning. And in the centre there was built a large
semicircular shade of willow boughs, in which the braves would dance
and sing, giving away presents of ponies, furs, hides, and trinkets
that please the eye.

One day there was a great dancing and a great giving away. Many ponies
had been led into the sunny centre of the semicircular shade, and given
away to those whom the criers called.

And Wa-choo-bay was there, standing tall and thin, alone amid all the
revellers, for more and more as the sunlights passed he thought deep
thoughts.

Among the Poncas sat a young squaw who was good to see, for she was
slender and taller than a common brave. And upon her forehead was the
tattooed sunspot that marked her for the daughter of the owner of many
ponies. She was called Umba (Sunlight), and she was the best to see of
all the daughters of the assembled tribes.

To-day she sat amid the revelling and saw none of it. She saw only the
tall youth, standing alone like a beech tree among a cluster of scrub
oaks. And her eyes grew soft as she looked.

And when the centre of the place of shade had cleared, she arose and
walked into the centre. There she stood, a stately figure, with soft
eyes fixed upon Wa-choo-bay.

At length she raised her arms toward him and sang a low, droning song,
like that a mother sings to her child in the evening when the fires
burn blue.

And all the people listened, breathless, for she was fair, and the
song, which was a song of love, was sung to Wa-choo-bay alone, standing
thin and tall and deep in thought.

Then when her song had ceased, she took off her blanket of dyed
buckskin, and, holding it at arms length toward Wa-choo-bay, she said:

I give my blanket to the tall and lonesome one. Let him come and take
it, and I shall follow him on all his trails, even if they be hard
trails that lead to death!

And Wa-choo-bay raised his eyes and gazed with a sad look upon the
Ponca woman. His voice came strong, but soft:

I cannot take the blanket; neither shall I ever take a squaw. For I am
a dreamer of dreams. I shall never hear _zhinga zhingas_ laughing about
my lodge. I am going on a long trail, for I follow a dream. Yet have
I never seen a woman so good to see. There is an ache in my breast as
I speak. Let this woman follow one who kills enemies and hunts bison.
I dream dreams, and a long trail is before me, and its end is in the
mist.

Then Umba moaned and walked out of the circle with her head bowed.

And Sky-Walker, seeing this, said:

It is even as I said. He was born in the time of the lone goose. He
shall be alone, but high in loneliness; and he shall go far, far.

And the time came when the tribes took the homeward trail. Then one day
Wa-choo-bay raised his voice among the people and said:

My time is come to go. I take a long, lonesome trail, for a dream
dreamed many times is leading me.

Then he went down to the great river where a canoe lay, and the people
followed.

They said no word as he pushed the canoe into the current and shot
downstream, for a white light was upon his face, and the dream rode
with him.

Then Sky-Walker and his old squaw climbed a high bluff and watched the
speck that was Wa-choo-bay fading in the mist of distance.

This is the last I shall see, said the old woman, for I am old and
the winter is in my hair. But great things will happen when I am gone.

And under the shade of a lean hand raised browward she saw the black
speck vanish in the blue of distance.

       *       *       *       *       *

Summers and winters passed. Sky-Walker and his old squaw died; the name
of Wa-choo-bay became a dim and mystic thing. Yet often about the
fires of winter, when the wind moaned about the lodges, the old men
talked of the going away of the Holy One, making the eyes of the youths
grow big with wonder.

And often the old men and women gazed from the high bluff down the dim
stretches of the muddy river, wondering when Wa-choo-bay would come
back, for it was said that great things would happen at his coming.

It happened many years after the going away of Wa-choo-bay that the
Omaha tribe had its village in the valley on a creek near the big muddy
water.

It was the time when the sunflowers made sunlight in the valleys and
when the women were busy pulling weeds from the gardens.

One evening a band of youths, who had been playing on the bluffs
overlooking the far reaches of the river, came with breathless speed
and terror-stricken faces into the village.

_Monda geeung_ [devil boat]! they cried, pointing to the river. A
big canoe breathing out smoke and fire is swimming up Ne Shoda.

The whole village scrambled up the bluffs, and what they saw was not
forgotten for many moons. It was a boat, but it was not as other boats.
It breathed smoke and fire. It grunted and puffed like a swimmer in a
heavy current.

It had a great arm that reached before it. Also it had two noses, where
the smoke and fire came out. It had eyes along its side that sparkled
in the evening sunlight. There was none to paddle it, yet it moved
steadily against the current.

The people stood bunched closely together and shivering with fear as
the monster approached. With a chugging and a swishing and a coughing,
it swam, turning its head towards the bluff where the people watched
and reaching out its one big arm toward them.

It sees us! It wishes to eat us! cried the people, and like a herd of
frightened bison they ran and tumbled down the bluff. They hid in their
lodges with their weapons grasped in their hands. They made no noise,
lest the monster should find them.

But the devil-swimmer did not come. The people listened. At length the
sound of the mighty breathing stopped, then it began again and grew
dimmer and dimmer until it died away far up the stream.

And when the people came forth cautiously from their hiding, a man,
tall, thin, with a strange look upon his bronze face, stood in the
centre of the village.

Awed by the mien of the stranger, the people stared in silence. The sun
had fallen and the shadows of the evening were about him. Also he wore
garments that were not as Wakunda meant garments should be.

The stranger cast a long gaze about him, then raised his arms and said
in a voice that was strong but soft:

I breathe peace upon my people.

The words were Omaha words, yet they sounded strange.

Again the voice was raised in the shadows and passed like a wind among
the people, shaking them.

I am Wa-choo-bayhe who followed the long dream-trailand I am come
back with a great wisdom for the tribes.

But the people only trembled, and the old men whispered:

It is not Wa-choo-bay, but his spirit. Well is the face remembered,
but the words are not man-words.

Then the stranger passed about the circle of the wondering people,
touching them as he went, for he had heard the whispering of the old
men. And the people shrank from him.

I am Wa-choo-bay, cried the stranger again. I am the son of
Sky-Walker. I am a man, and not a spirit. Give me meat, for I am
hungry.

And they gave him meat, and he ate. Then only did the people know him
for a man.

In the days that followed, Wa-choo-bay told many strange things of the
white-faced race whose camp fires were kindled ever nearer and nearer
the people of the prairie. Also he said words that were not common
words. They were medicine-words.

And before many moons had grown and died these things travelled far and
wide across the prairie, until in many tribes the wonder grew. Around
many camp fires was told the tale of how an Omaha had come back after
being many years in the lands that lay toward the place of summer;
also of the devil-boat in which he came, and of the new wisdom he was
talking.

So there was a great moving of the tribes toward the village of the
Omahas. The Poncas, the Pawnees, the Osages, the Missouris, the
Otoesall heard the strange tale and took the trail that led to the
village lying in the flat lands of Ne Shoda.

And in the time when the prairie was brown there was a great gathering
of the prairie peoples in the flat lands.

The cluster of villages that they made was so broad that a strong man
walked from morning until the sun was high before he reached the other
side. Then one morning when the tribes had gathered Wa-choo-bay went
to the top of a bluff that stood bleak against the sky, and the people
followed, sitting below him upon the hillside, for they wished to hear
the strange words that would be spoken that day.

Wa-choo-bay, standing thin and tall against the sky, raised his arms
and his face to the heavens, breathing strange words above the people,
upon whom a great hush fell.

And it happened that in the hush a tamed wolf among the people near
the summit of the bluff raised its snout and mourned into the sudden
stillness.

And its master beat it for the noise it made until it cried with pain.

Then a strange thing happened. Wa-choo-bay walked in among the gazers
and laid caressing hands upon the wolf, calling it by gentle names
until it licked his hands.

And when he returned to the summit, the wolf followed, licking the feet
of Wa-choo-bay as it went.

Then Wa-choo-bay raised his voice, and it went even to the farthest
listener, though it seemed a soft voice.

This is the first I shall teach you: be kind to everything that lives.

And the people wondered much. This was a new teaching.

In the hush of awe that fell, Wa-choo-bay spoke again, while the wolf
sat by him, licking his feet. He told of his being in the lands that
lay toward the summer; of the great white-faced race that lived there;
of the great villages that they built, having lodges bigger than half a
prairie village.

He told of the strength of this great white-faced race; of how they
were moving steadily toward the people of the prairie. And then he told
in quaint phrases the story of Christ and His teachings of kindness.

These things I learned from the great medicine-men of the white-faced
race, and they are wise men, said Wa-choo-bay. It is this that has
made their people great. So I have come to say: Have no more fighting
on the prairie; be one great tribe, even like the white-faces; build
great villages like them, for I have learned that only they who build
great villages and do not wander shall live. The others must flee like
the bison when hunters follow.

And I will teach you the wise words of the great white Wakundas Son,
who died because he loved all the tribes. It is a teaching of peacea
teaching that we be kind to our enemies.

Then there arose one among the Osages, an old man, and he said:

These are big words. Let Wa-choo-bay call down rain upon us if this
big white God loves him.

Then arose one among the Pawnees, and he cried in broken Omaha:

I say with my Osage brother, let Wa-choo-bay do some medicine-deed,
that we may know him for a holy one.

And still another among the Poncas arose and said:

If this be true that we have heard, how Wa-choo-bay came back in
a holy boat, and that his big white Wakunda is so strong and loves
Wa-choo-bay, let him send the rain, and we will fall upon our faces.

Then the whole concourse of tribes sent up a shout:

Give us some medicine-deed!

And when the shout had died, Wa-choo-bay smiled a smile of pity and
said:

I am not the big white Wakunda; I am only one who talks for Him and
loves Him, for I have seen a new light. I can do no medicine-deeds.
Neither can anyone among you do medicine-deeds. It is all a
dreamingand we must awaken.

Then there was a great crying, an angry storm of voices about the hill.
It beat upon the bleak summit where Wa-choo-bay stood with face and
hands raised to the heavens, breathing a prayer of the white-faces.

There was a breaking up of the concourse and a walking away. But one
among the people hurled a stone with sure aim and struck Wa-choo-bay
upon the side of the face. He staggered, and the blood came. But he
showed no anger.

Turning the other side of his face, he said:

Let him who threw the stone throw again and strike me here. Even so
the great white Wakundas Son suffered.

But the second stone was not cast, and Wa-choo-bay was left alone with
the wolf upon the summit, kneeling and muttering words of kindness.

The day passed, and still he knelt upon the summit. But when the dark
had fallen, he became aware of someone near him. He raised his head and
saw in the starlight a woman lying upon her face before him, and she
was moaning.

Wa-choo-bay lifted her and looked into her face. It was a face that he
had known of old, only the winters had changed it.

I am Umba, the Ponca woman, she said. Many summers ago I spoke to
you. Do you remember?

And Wa-choo-bay said: I have not forgotten.

Then said Umba, the Ponca woman: Even now it is the same as then. I
have come to take the hard trail with you, even the trail that leads to
death, for in all these winters and summers I have taken no man.

And she wiped the blood from his face with her blanket of buckskin.

There was an aching in the breast of Wa-choo-bay as he said these
words, which the Ponca woman could not understand, though her tongue
was one with his:

From now through all the summers and winters that follow, your name
shall be Mary.

Have you heard my words? he said after a long silence.

I have heard, said the woman, and I believe. I alone among all the
villagers believe.

Then shall you follow me on my lonesome trail. I see not its end, for
it is in the mist.

       *       *       *       *       *

The days when the prairie was brown passed, and the snows came. And
there was one who followed a bitter winter trail.

From village to village he went, speaking words of kindness and doing
good deeds. But everywhere he was driven from the villages. And there
were two who followed himtwo faithful disciplesthe woman, whose name
was changed to Mary, and the wolf.

And ever the tall thin man, whose face was pinched with hunger and the
cold, gave kind words to those who offered blows.

It happened in the time of _Hunga-Mubli_the time when the snows drift
against the north sides of the lodges, that a rumour ran across the
prairiea rumour that a strange sickness had come to the village of the
Poncas. It was the sickness called _Gchatunga_, the sickness of the
big, red sores.

Then Wa-choo-bay and his two disciples turned weary feet toward the
stricken village of the Poncas. It was a hard trail, with little food
and much cold.

And when the three entered the stricken village there was a rejoicing
among the Poncas, for they said:

Might it not be that this one whom we have spurned is stronger than we
thought?

But Wa-choo-bay sang no medicine-songs; he performed no mystic rites.
With tender hands he nursed the sick. Also he knelt beside them and
said soft words that were not the words of the prairie.

And it happened that the invisible arrows of the Terror fell thicker
and thicker among the Poncas. The sickness spread, and the village was
filled with the delirious shrieks of the dying.

So a great, angry wail went up against Wa-choo-bay.

The sickness grows greater, not less, said those who were still
strong. This Wa-choo-bays words are not true words. There is a black
spirit in him.

So it happened that arms that were still strong seized Wa-choo-bay
and bound him with thongs of buckskin. Then he was led afar from the
village to the bleak, cold summit of a hill.

There they planted a post and bound Wa-choo-bay to it.

And the woman, whose name was changed to Mary, begged for him, and the
wolf, with its four feet huddled together in the snow, mourned with an
upward thrusting of the snout.

But Wa-choo-bay said:

Do not wail for me. This is the place where my trail ends. This is
what was in the mist. Let these whom I love do as they will do.

And when they had bound him to the post they whipped him with elkhorn
whips.

Where is your white Wakunda? they cried, and it was a hate cry.

Here beside us stands the white Wakunda and His Son! said
Wa-choo-bay; and his brow was wet with the sweat of agony. But the
whippers did not see, and the whips fell harder.

And after some time Wa-choo-bay raised his head weakly to the darkening
heavens, for the sun had fallen, and moaned soft words that were not
prairie words.

Then his head fell forward upon his breast.

The whips fell no more. The whippers departed.

The sky was like a sheet of frosty metal and the stars were like broken
ice.

Against the sky hung the thin figure of Wa-choo-bay lashed to the post,
and beneath him in the shadow huddled two who sent trembling cries of
sorrow into the empty spaces of the snowa woman and a wolf.




IX

THE TRIUMPH OF SEHA


WHEN Seha had grown to be a tall youth, he said to the old men: Now
I am almost a man; what shall I do? For being a youth, he dreamed of
great things. And the old men answered: That Wakunda knows; therefore,
take yourself to a high hill; there fast and pray until sleep comes,
and with it a vision.

So Seha arose and laid aside his garments, and naked, went out on the
prairie. When he had gone far, he climbed to the top of a lonely hill,
bare of grass and strewn with flakes of stone that made its summit
white like the head of a man who has seen many winters.

Then he knelt upon the flinty summit, and raising his palms to the
heavens, he cried: O Wakunda, here needy stands Seha! Four times he
uttered the cry, yet there was no sound save that of the crow overhead,
and the wind in the short grass of the hillside.

Then he fell into an agony of weeping, and wetting his palms with his
tears, he rubbed them in the white dust and smeared his face with mud.
Then he cast his wet eyes to the heavens, and again raised his hands in
supplication.

O Wakunda, Seha is a young man; he would do great things like the old
men; send him a vision!

The night came down and still he held his eyes upon the darkening
heavens, crying for a vision. But only the coyote answered him. The
stars looked out of the east and steadily climbed upward, gazing upon
his tearful face. But when the grey of age began to grow upon the
forehead of the Night, he grew so weary that he fell forward upon his
face and slept.

And lo! the vision came!

It seemed that the skies were black and fierce as the face of a brave
in anger. The lightning glared; and the thunder shouted like a warrior
in the front of the battle! Then the cloud split, and through it rushed
a mighty eagle with the lightning playing on its wings; its cry was
like the shriek of a dying foe and its eyes were bright with the vision
that sees far. Its wings hovered over Seha, and it spoke:

Seha shall be a seer of things far off. His thought shall be quick as
the lightning, and his voice shall be as thunder in the ears of men!

Seha awoke, and he was shivering with the dews of morning. Then he
arose and walked back toward his village, slowly, for his thoughts were
great. Four days he went about the village, speaking to no one; and the
people whispered: Seha has had a vision; do you not see that his eyes
are big with a strange light?

One night after the four days had passed, Seha arose from his blankets
and, creeping stealthily out of his tepee, he went to the lodge of
Ebahamba, who was a great medicine-man, for Seha wished to tell his
vision into a wise ear.

Pulling back the buffalo robe that hung across the entrance he saw the
great man sleeping in the moonlight that fell through the opening at
the top of the tepee. Entering, he touched the shoulder of the sleeper,
who awoke with a start, and, sitting up, stared at the young intruder.
Then Ebahamba being thoroughly awakened, spoke:

Seha has come to tell his vision; I knew he would come; speak.

You are a great man, began Seha, and your eyes are like the suns
eyes to see into the shadow. Hear me and teach me.

Then he told of his vision on the lonely hill.

As Ebahamba listened to the wonderful thing that had befallen the
youth, his heart grew cold with envy; for certainly great things were
in store for Seha, and might it not come to pass that the youth should
grow even greater in power than Ebahamba himself?

So, when the youth had ceased, breathless with the wonder of the thing
he told, the old man said coldly: Wakunda will teach Seha; let him go
learn of the wind and the growing things!

Then the youth arose and left the lodge. But the big medicine-man slept
no more that night, for jealousy is sleepless.

At that time it happened that the winds were hot from the southwest,
and the maize grew yellow as the sun that smote it, and the rainless
air curled its blades. And the old man Ebahamba cried to Wakunda for
rain; but the skies only glared back for answer.

Then a great moan went up before the lodge of the big medicine-man,
Ebahamba. Ebahamba speaks with the spirits; let him pray to the
thunder spirits that we may have food for our squaws and our children!

And Ebahamba shut himself in his tepee four days, fasting, crying to
the thunder spirits, and performing strange rites. But every morning
the sun arose glaring like the eye of a man who dies of fever, and the
hot wind sweltered up from the southwest, moaning hoarsely like one who
moans with thirst; and the maize heard the moan and wilted.

Then when the people grew clamorous before the lodge of Ebahamba, he
came forth and said: The thunder spirits are sleeping; they are weary
and drowsy with the heat. And the hooting of his people drove him back
into his lodge.

Then Seha raised his voice above the despairing murmur of the village,
saying: Seha is a young man, yet the thunder spirits will hear him,
be they ever so drowsy, for Seha has had a vision. Seha will call the
rain.

The murmur of the people ceased, for so strange a light was in the
eyes of the youth that they believed.

Let Seha give us rain, they cried, and he shall be a great man among
his people!

Then Seha strode out of the village and disappeared in the hills. His
heart was loud as he walked, for would he not be a great man among his
people? He believed in his power with that belief which is the power.
All day he walked, and when the red sun glared across the western hills
like an eye bloodshot with pain, he came to a clump of cottonwoods that
sang upon the summit of a bluff.

Now the thunder spirits love the cottonwoods, for they rise sternly
from the earth, reaching their long arms into the clouds, and they cry
back at the storm with a loud voice. Where the cottonwood sings, there
the thunder spirits sleep, and the thunder birds, the eagle and the
hawk, watch with keen eyes.

Under the trees Seha stood, and raising his hands and his eyes to the
heavens, he cried: Hear Seha! For is he not a thunder man? Did he not
dream the thunder mans dream? Then I command you, send the big clouds
boiling before the wind; send the rains, that my people may have food
for their children. Then I will be a great man among my people!

The trees only tossed their branches above him, while they sang softly
in the wind.

O Thunder Spirits! he cried again. You are not asleep! I hear you
talking together in the tree tops. Listen to me, for I am a thunder
man!

Then a dead calm grew. The cottonwoods were still. Suddenly they
groaned with a cool gust from the east. The groan was like a waking
mans groan when he arises, stretching and yawning, from his blankets.

Then Seha lay down to sleep; for were not the thunder spirits awake?

When the night was late, Seha was awakened by the howl of the thunder.
He saw the quick lightning pierce the boiling darkness in the east.
Then the rain drops danced upon the dry hills with a sound like the
unintelligible patter of many voices that are glad.

Seha was glad, and he answered the shout of the thunder. His people in
the village were glad, and their tongues were noisy with the name of
Seha. The maize was glad and it looked up to the kind sky, tossing its
arms in exultation.

When Seha returned to the village, he was the centre of a joyful cry;
he had become a great man among his people. And when they asked from
whence he had such great powers, he said: I caught it from the blowing
wind; I heard it in the growing of the maize.

But there was one who did not greet the mysterious youth. Ebahamba
shut himself in his tepee, for had he not failed to awaken the thunder
spirits when a youth had succeeded? Ebahamba sat sullenly in his
tepee, thinking great and fierce thoughts; and after many days of
fasting, his magic came back to him. Then he summoned to his lodge one
by one, the men of his band, and he said to each: Behold! Seha speaks
with evil spirits. May he not destroy his people? Then let us perform
the rite of _Wazhinadee_ against him that he may be forsaken by man and
beast and so die!

The men of his band believed Ebahamba, for his magic was very great
now, and he forced them to believe. So each man went to his tepee, shut
himself in, feasted and thought sternly against Seha. For this is the
manner of the rite of _Wazhinadee_.

Then after his enemies had thought strongly for many days against
him, Seha was seized with a strange weakness. His eyes lost their
brightness, and he could not see far as before. All through the days
and the nights he went about the village, crying for his lost power;
and the people said: The coyotes are barking in the hills. They could
not see him for the mist that the terrible rite had cast about him.

Then Seha wandered out on the prairie, wailing as ever for his lost
power. And after many days, he laid himself down by a stream to die.
But he did not die. He slept; and the vision came again. When he awoke,
he was strong again and his eyes could see far as before.

Then he said: I will cleanse myself in the stream and go back to my
people, for I am strong again.

But lo! as he leaned over the clear stream, he beheld the reflected
image of an eagle far above him. Now a medicine man can change himself
at will into anything that walks or crawls or flies or is still; and as
Seha watched the eagle, he knew that it was Ebahamba!

So gliding into the stream, he quickly changed himself into a great
fish floundering temptingly upon the surface. The eagle, which was
Ebahamba, being hungry, swooped down upon the fish with wide beak and
open talons.

In a moment, Seha changed himself into a huge boulder, against which
the swooping bird dashed furiously, crushing its beak and talons. Then
it arose, and with bloody wings, fluttered across the prairie.

Seha stepped out of his rock and laughed a loud, long laugh, and the
eagle, which was Ebahamba, heard and knew.

So Seha returned to his village and was a great man among his people.
But Ebahamba hid himself in his tepee; and a rumour ran that his arms
were broken and his face crushed.

And there was much wonder in the village!




X

THE END OF THE DREAM


THE old woman Gunthai had nothing but a past over which she brooded and
a son upon whom she doted. Had she been able to write the latter in the
letters of that tongue which came to the prairie many moons after her
death, breaking with syllables of magic the spell of the centuries,
she would have written it with a u; for her son was as the day to
her; his coming was the morning and his going was the sunset. When he
laughed, there was summer in the wretched little tepee; when he cried,
the snows drifted about the mother-heart.

Winter and summer the old woman sat in her lodge, her back bent with
the burdens of many seasons and her face seamed with many memories; yet
stern and expressionless as of one who has followed a long trail and
cannot see its end though the sun be falling.

All day she would sit in her lodge, weaving baskets of willow, which
she exchanged with her tribesmen for meat and robes; for the father
of her child was dead. Her little boy, whom she tenderly called Nu
Zhinga (Little Man), would lie long hours before her with his chin
resting upon his little brown hands, watching the fingers of his mother
weave the pliant twigs into form with marvellous skill, as it seemed
to him; and often when the hours crept lamely, he would sing to her
a monotonous song like the winds, timing the irregular air with the
beating of his toes upon the floor.

And when the little singer would cease, the old woman Gunthai often
forgot the unwoven basket with gazing into his big black eyes, for in
them her hope could read great deeds that were to be done after many
unborn moons had waned.

Then she would tell him tales of his father; tales that were loud with
the snarl of war drums, the twang of bow thongs, the shriek of arrows,
the beat of hoofs! But there was no responsive glitter in the eyes of
the boy; his heart was not the warriors, and the old mother seeing
this, sighed and fell to work with nervous haste.

And the days of sun and snow wove themselves into years, until Nu
Zhinga had reached that time when boyhood begins to deepen into
manhood; and yet as the mother looked upon her son, she found him
scarcely taller than a weak mans bow.

His legs were short and bowed, his hips narrow, and upon shoulders of
abnormal breadth sat his monstrous, shaggy head. It was as if he were
the visible body of a black spirits joke, save for his lustrous eyes,
that were like two stars that burn big in the air of evening through a
film of mist.

And thus it was that when Nu Zhinga passed through the village, those
who were still foolish with youth jeered at the lad, calling his name
in contempt; but the old men and women who had grown wise, only shook
their heads and pitied Gunthai in silence.

But the boy would take no notice of his tormentors, walking on sullen
and silent. He lived in a little world of his own, which was isolated
from the great world by the unkindness of his people, like a range of
frozen hills; and in this small world there were but three dwellers:
Gunthai, a tame grey wolf, and one other. That other was a despised
little cripple and her name was Tabea (Frog).

These three, and about them the chromatic glory of dreams like a
sunrise that lingersthis was the world of Nu Zhinga. All day amid
the quiet of the summer hills Nu Zhinga and Tabea played together;
he telling of the great indefinite things that he would do in that
big mysterious sometime when the days would be pregnant with wonders!
For in his soul the pulse of uncertain but lofty resolve bounded, and
as he peered into the future, lo! it was vast, yet dim with misty
possibilities like a broad stretch of prairie expanding under the new
moon! And she, with all of her crooked little body attentive, listened
and believed even more than she heard; which is the way of those who
love.

And then these two, after the manner of children, would play at life,
building a tepee with willows from a convenient creek; and Tabea would
groan as she bore the heavy burdens, thus showing how she would toil
for him and suffer. Then when the tepee was built, she would go about
droning a song, with her back bent as with the weight of an infant,
thus showing how she would carry the child of Nu Zhinga in that big and
sunlit sometime.

One day when the last white footstep of the winter had vanished from
the coldest valley, the old woman Gunthai laid aside a finished basket
and called her boy to her side.

It is the time, she said; the time is ripe with summers. Nu Zhinga
must eat no meat for four days; then he must go to the hill where the
visions come, that he may know what is to be for him in the light of
the unborn moons.

So Nu Zhinga ate no meat for four days, and when the fourth evening
came, as the fires roared upward among the circled lodges, he passed
through the village and took his way to the high hill of dreams. It was
the time when the valleys are loud with the song of frogs and when the
Earth begins to learn anew the pleasant lesson of the Sun.

When he had stopped, breathless with toiling up the long incline, for
he was weak with hunger, he turned and looked back upon the jumbled
village and saw, indistinctly through the mist of the evening, his
mother standing before the door of her lodge, straining her gaze that
she might see her boy for the last time, climbing to the height where
the dream awaited, that should send him back a man with a future big
in deeds.

Then Nu Zhinga climbed on to the summit of the hill and watched the
west pass from brilliant colours into dun, and the darkness come with
the stars. In the light of a thin moon the far hills whitened. The
big stars glowed kindly like the camp fires of a friendly people. The
night wind talked to itself in the gulches; and attentive to these, Nu
Zhinga forgot the reason of his coming, and lulled by the many pleasant
sounds, fell asleep and was awakened by the pale damp Dawn.

Then he ran down the hill, and as he passed through the village, the
old women, some busy about the steaming kettles, others bent beneath
the loads of fuel, shook their heads and said: Gunthais boy has had
no vision; not so do they return who dream great dreams.

In the doorway of her lodge Gunthai stood awaiting the approach of her
son. Her body that was wont to be bent like a bow upon which a heavy
hand is laid in anger, was erect and quivering as is the bow when the
arrow has sped like a purpose. Upon her leathery, wrinkled face dwelt
the glimmer of an inner illumination. Only the flesh was old, the light
was young; for Hope is a youth.

As the lad approached, the tenseness of expectation held the old
womans tongue and her question came from her eyes. What has Nu Zhinga
dreamed?

I saw the stars that were like the eyes of a friend, said the boy,
and I heard the wind as it sang to itself in the gulches. I slept and
woke and the Sun was laughing on the hills!

Many seasons sit lightly upon a form when Hope sits with them; but
Despair is heavy, and again the weight of many years bent the shoulders
of the mother. When the sun leaves a cloud of glory, it leaves a mass
of murk; thus passed the light from the wrinkled face of Gunthai.

There was a sigh in her voice as she spoke; a sigh like that of a wind
that is heavy with rain: There should have come a dream loud with the
noises of battle and shrill with the flight of arrows! Thus did your
father dream.

So Nu Zhinga went a second and a third and a fourth time to the hill of
dreams, and the last answer that his mother heard was like the first.
And on the fifth day the heart of the old mother was sore with sorrow,
and all that night she did not sleep, but wept and moaned: How shall
Gunthai be comforted when her eyes are dim and her fingers stiff? Her
son shall not be mighty in the hunt and battle, for he has had no
dream.

The lad, awakened in the night by the moaning of his mother, knew in
an indefinite way that he was the cause of so much grief; and in his
breast grew a great pang of soul hunger that would not pass away. Even
with the giant joy of the sunrise it did not pass away.

In the early light Nu Zhinga passed out of the village, for his heart
was heavy. As he walked, lo everything was sad except the sun, and the
light of its gladness deepened the shadow of his sorrow. The sound of
the wind moving in the bunch grass of the hillside was like a faint cry
of a great pain. At length he threw himself down and buried his face in
the grass. The despair of those who dream daydreams was upon him. There
was night in his heart; his small body shook with sobs. A long while he
lay thus, nor did he hear the soft step that stopped beside him.

At length Nu Zhinga raised his head from the grass and saw Tabea
sitting beside him with pity in her eyes and in the attitude of her
crooked little body. Without a word they stared each into the face of
the other; and as Nu Zhinga looked, the desolate grey of the world
began to develop its wonted brilliance of colour, as though the union
of their tears had produced a prism.

At length these two arose and walked among the hills, dreaming as was
their wont, and again the sunlight entered the heart of Nu Zhinga. When
the two outcasts entered the village, even though the youths trooped
behind them shouting Peazha! (no good), yet the sunlight did not
pass; for upon one hand walked the dreams of Nu Zhinga and upon the
other, Tabea.

One day in the time of the gathering of the maize, when the brown hills
shivered with the first frosts, the voice of a crier was heard through
the village calling the braves to battle; for the big chief of the
Omahas would lead a war party against the Sioux.

So the old woman Gunthai took down the weapons of her fallen brave from
the side of the tepee where they had hung in idleness for many moons.
She strung the long unbent bow with a thong of buckskin and retipped
the arrows with the feathers of the hawk. Then she wept over them,
and blessed them with weird songs; and calling Nu Zhinga to her side,
placed them in his hands, and said: Bring them back red with the blood
of the Sioux!

And the youth took them, wondering why it was so very great a thing to
kill.

Then the war party rode out of the village and Nu Zhinga rode with it.
And there were two who climbed to the highest hill and, shading their
eyes with their hands, watched the braves disappear into the distance.
They were Gunthai and Tabea, and the hopes of each were great. For
might not even Nu Zhinga do great deeds? Such things had been.

After many days the returning band rode up the valley that rang with
the song of victory. But when it rode into the village, a great cry
went up against Nu Zhinga, the squaw-hearted. For in the battle with
the Sioux his pony had fallen with an arrow in its breast, and when the
Omahas returned from the pitiless pursuit of their flying foes, they
found him crying like a squaw over the carcass of the animal.

When the people heard this concerning Nu Zhinga, an angry cry, like
that of a strong wind in a thicket, passed over the multitude gathered
about the braves. Let him go work with the squaws! they cried. And
the unanimous cry of a people is a law.

So Nu Zhinga, the squaw-hearted, carried water and wood with the women
and was patient. At least he had Tabea ever near him, which was like
living in the light of perpetual sunrise, and hope, like an incurable
disease, would not leave his breast.

The old woman Gunthai seeing how more than squaw-hearted her son had
grown, sat in her lodge weaving the baskets of willow. But the hope of
her heart was gone. How she had dreamed of the prowess of her little
man! How he would be mighty among his people; mighty with the arm that
is pitiless and stronga slayer of enemies! But nowand the old womans
thought would check itself at that barren gulch in the hills through
which Death comes like a blast of bitter winds, for she could see no
further.

So the suns came and went; but there was night for her in the brightest
noon; the seasons passed, but for her heart there was cold, even in the
kind midsummer.

One day in the time of the cubs (December) it happened that a child of
the village was stricken with a mysterious sickness. The fierce heat of
the time of the sunflowers blazed in its blood. Its eyes glowed with
the brightness of a burning thing. Its lips muttered strange words that
were not the words of men; and those who listened, trembled. And after
some time, the whole burning body of the child became one mass of sores.

It was then that Washkahee, the big medicine-man, came to the lodge of
the sick, sang his most potent songs and performed his most mysterious
rites. But one day the child leaped to its feet and stared at the
wall with eyes that were glazed with terror; then shrieked and fell
back limply into its blankets. And when the winter had crept into
its burning blood, they buried it upon a hill; and the wonder of the
village was great.

But the end was not yet. Another and another crept into his blankets,
stricken with the same sickness. Then another and another, until from
many lodges came the moans of the afflicted. Those who dwelt in the
lodges where the scourge entered, fled from their stricken kinsmen
as from the visible body of Death. They who could laugh back at the
challenge of the Sioux, quailed before the subtle creeping of this
invisible foe. They who were as yet untouched by the unseen Hand,
huddled terrified and speechless about their fires, in the light of
which they stared at each other and found each face ghastly, as though
it were the mirror of their dread.

In the stillness of their bated breaths they heard the lonesome
monotony of the winter wind and the swish of the drifting snow, through
the drone of which pierced like arrows of ice the occasional shrieks
of the deserted dying or those who battled with grotesque terrors in
the giddy whirl of feverish delirium.

With trembling fingers the women bound blankets closely across the
doors of the lodges, in the hope of barring out the black spirit
that wandered about the village. Vain hope! Through the walls of the
strongest lodge crept the subtle spirit.

One night the sound of a wild voice crying through the storm beat into
the lodges:

Washkahee has cried to Wakunda [God] and lo! Washkahee has dreamed!
Only a tuft of hair from the head of the white bison can save us! So
spoke the dream to Washkahee; who will seek the white bison?

It was as though the winter wind had found words! The people, huddled
about their fires, knew the voice to be that of the big medicine-man,
Washkahee, yet they did not move. The bravest had become weak as a
child at the back of a squaw.

That night Nu Zhinga, lying in the lodge of his mother, heard the cry
that came out of the storm; and when he slept he dreamed. He had walked
far across the white prairie and his legs were aching with toil and
his heart with despair. Then there broke upon his dream a mighty roar,
and lo! he saw, charging down upon him, the white bison, tossing the
crusted snow from its lowered horns.

Tae Ska! Tae Ska! (white bison) Nu Zhinga cried, and was awakened by
his own voice.

So in the early light of the morning, Nu Zhinga took down the bow and
arrows of his father, and wrapping himself in a buffalo robe, he strode
out into the prairie with his tame wolf trotting at his heels. To him
the dream was an omen. Might he not find the white bison, and thus
drive death from among his people?

As he walked, the dream that had ever crept like a slow music through
his blood, grew into the swaying fury of a battle-song. He timed his
brisk steps with a joyous chant that echoed up the frosty valleys.
He would find the white bison! Then his people would shout his name
without derision. Gunthai would be glad; Tabea would be glad. Tabea!
The word was music.

But meanwhile in the village thicker and thicker fell the invisible
arrows of the Terror; and in the lodges where they fell dwelt the cry
of agony and delirium and the muffled shriek of death. The old woman
Gunthai and the cripple Tabea were not spared. The old and the young,
the weak and the strong, the brave and the cowardly found no spell to
ward away the stroke of the hidden Hand.

At length the fear of the tribe grew into a frenzy. It needed but an
incident to lash it into madness.

One evening as the night crept westward across the hills, a brave
leaped upon a pony and yelling sent the frightened animal flying up
the valley. He was fleeing from the curse that hung over the village.
Then the fear became a madness. The people rushed from their lodges
and, fighting for the nearest pony, fled after the lone rider who had
disappeared into the night.

Those who were too weak or too unfortunate to gain the back of a
pony hung to the mane and were dragged in the snow until their grips
weakened, when they ran with frantic shrieks after their disappearing
tribesmen. The valley leading from the village became choked with the
fleeing people. Many of the stricken leaped from their blankets and
followed in the wild rout, until their knees weakened and their brains
swam, when they lay shrieking in the snow until death came.

From the deserted village the cries of the helpless followed the
unhearing refugees, who fled as the bison flee when the pitiless hunter
follows. Fainter and fainter grew the yelling until it was swallowed up
in the wind that lashed the spraying snow. When the morning looked into
the valley, it found no smoke arising from the silent lodges. Only the
dead were there; the dead and the winter.

On the evening of the second day after the flight of the tribe, a lone
form topped the hill above the village and looked down into the still
white valley, where lay the snow-choked lodges, quiet as a dream. The
form was short, and bent as with the toil and hunger of a long, hard
trail. At its heels a gaunt, grey wolf limped and whimpered with the
ache of emptiness and the frost.

The short, bent form stood still upon the summit and shading its eyes
with a hand that trembled, cast a long and searching gaze upon the
lodges of his people. No smoke, no voice, no roar of fires, scented
with the evening meal!

The form straightened itself and stood with head thrown back, making
a thin and pitiful figure against the cruel white glare of the icy
evening sky. It put a hand to its mouth, trumpet-wise, and raising the
other above its head, waved about a tuft of long, grey hair.

Tae Ska! Tae Ska!

The voice was scarcely raised above a faint, dry wheeze that sighed
dirge-like above the lifeless valley. The grey wolf with its four
trembling legs drawn together in the snow, raised its frost-whitened
muzzle to the fading sky and with a long, wild wail drowned the feebler
voice of its master.

With limping stride, grown short and uncertain as the first steps of a
papoose, the form went down the hillside and entered the village where
the Winter dwelt.

Tae Ska! Tae Ska! I have found the white bison!

The wheezing voice passed among the lodges like a mournful wind that
haunts the lonesome places of a bluff. Round and round the village went
the man and the wolf, crying into the silent lodges; and the mans face
was wolflike with weariness and hunger; and the wolfs eyes were grown
half human with the pinch of emptiness and frost.

Why do you not come forth, for I have suffered and I have the tuft of
hair? No more shall the black spirits dwell among us! Come forth and
look upon the face of him whose heart was the heart of a squaw!

The crisp snow whined beneath his step and the wolf whined beside him.
At last the form stopped before a lodge and with a trembling hand drew
away the covering at the entrance.

It was the lodge of Gunthai. Two forms lay within, huddled in their
blankets, and the snows had drifted about them. The man pulled the
blankets from their faces. One was Gunthai and the other Tabea. Each
was pinched with the pinch of death and winter, and the mystery of the
last long, lonesome trail was about them both.

With a moan the form tottered and fell upon its face in the snow. And
over all the valley there were but two soundsthe wail of the winter
wind and the howl of a lone wolf.

Days passed, and the people who had fled from home with the pitiless
scourge at their heels grew faint and weary with their wandering,
and at last the homeache drove them back upon their trail. Footsore,
famished, racked with the now dead terror, they toiled in silence
homeward, where they could die with the sound of their own fires in
their ears.

At last one morning a lone rider cautiously peered from under the
brow of the hill upon the village. Nothing moved below. He urged his
emaciated pony to the summit of the hill and stopping, gazed again,
shading his eyes with a hand grown weak and thin. There seemed nothing
in the valley to fear. Turning about upon his pony, he raised his arms
in the light of dawn and cried back into the valley beyond to the
waiting remnant of his peoplea long, exultant cry, for he had looked
upon his home.

Slowly the returning tribe, now dwindled to half its former numbers,
toiled up the hill. Only the strong were left, and now the strong were
weak. The straggling band of men, women and ponies reached the summit,
a pitiful, ragged multitude, and gazed for a moment into the valley.
Then a great shout arose above the silent spaces, scintillant under the
dawn, as the halting, famished band swooped down the hill to be again
at home.

Again the fires roared upward from the lodges, and the voices of a
happy people drove away the silence of the winter. There was no longer
any disease; the winter and the flight had purged the tribe.

Who had saved them from the black spirits? Could a tribe run faster
than the things which are not good?

The sun was at the centre of its short path when the answer to this
question of the tribe broke into the lodges where the people sat about
their steaming kettles. For it was then that one ran through the
village waving a tuft of long, grey hair and startling the ears of his
people with a shout:

See! The tuft of hair from the head of the white bison! It has saved
us; for do you not remember the words of Washkahee?

The people rushed from their lodges and thronged about the man who held
the tuft of hair.

Who has found the white bison? they cried.

And the answer of him who held the tuft of hair struck the people
silent with wonder:

It was Nu Zhinga, the squaw-hearted; even he who could not dream a
dream!




XI

THE REVOLT OF A SHEEP

 There is nothing more terrible than the revolt of a sheep, said De
 Marsay._Balzac._


OH, shut up, Hank! Dang it! Haint you goin to let a feller sleep
none? How can I be strong enough to keep from snivellin in the
mornin, if I dont get my sleep?

A small man with a thin, weak face, that might have suggested the
vacuous countenance of a sheep had it not been for an expression of
anguish and childish petulance, sat up among a bunch of furs in the
corner of the cabin. He supported himself tremblingly upon an arm and
stared with watery, haggard eyes upon Hank, who regarded him wistfully.

Hank was a big man and raw-boned. His big, quiet, hirsute face
contrasted strongly with the face of the other. About his waist hung
a belt containing a pair of six-shooters. Since the dark had fallen
he had been pacing nervously back and forth across the cabin floor,
his eyebrows knit, his face twitching, now and then offering a soft
word of comfort to the little man who lay among the furs in the corner
breathing fitfully.

Cuss your hide, Hank! You know I haint slep none for a week, and
you go on a-trampin and a-gabbin till you got me all on needles! Why
cant you leave me be? O damn it!

The last words were more like a sob than a curse; and the white, thin
face and quivering lips seemed too impotent for the words. Hank stopped
pacing up and down, and with his fists resting upon his hips he stared
at the little man.

Now, Sheep, he drawled kindly, you haint got no call to talk that
away. Haint I tryin to be your friend to the finish? I was just
thinkin to cheer you up sos youd make a respectble, manly hangin.
I didnt go to rile you.

The little man thus addressed as Sheep drew himself up into a
shivering bunch among the furs and groaned. The big man shook his head
slowly and sat down, leaning against the wall of the cabin. Pore
Sheep, he muttered.

For an hour he sat with his chin in his hands, staring with pitying
eyes upon the huddled little man, who now and again shook with
shuddering sobs. The candle flame flickered dismally in the night wind
that came in through the chinks in the wall.

At length a series of stifled groans grew up among the furs,
accompanied by a spasmodic jerking of the limbs of the little man.
With a deep sigh he sat up. With an imbecile droop of the lower jaw,
and eyes that burned feverishly with utter horror, he stared at his
companion.

O cuss you, Hank! he broke out querulously, why cant you talk none?
You goin to let me keep a-slippin down, down, down right into hell
and never say a word to me? What you settin there like a bump on a log
for?

Wy, Sheep, said the big man kindly; thought you was tryin to
snooze.

Snooze! How can I snooze with a million little devils runnin up and
down my backbone and adancin all over my head? You knowed I couldnt
sleep! You knowed I haint slep for a week! Snooze! O damn it! Haint
I goin to get plenty of snoozin when they drag the cart out from n
under me in the mornin?

Sheeps voice broke; the fire went out of his eyes; his teeth chattered
as though a sudden gust of winter had struck him.

Now, Sheep, said Hank, dont be so riled up like. I know its hard
to go out that away; but it wont last long, and it cant hurt much
after the first jerk. I reckon it dont matter much how a feller goes
out after hes gone.

Oh, shut that up!

The little man leaned against the wall and closed his eyes. After a
considerable silence the big man produced a flask of liquor and spoke
soothingly.

Want a drink, Sheepy, old man?

The little man leaped up with a glimmer of hope in his eyes.

Course I do! What made you keep a-hidin it when you knowed all
along thats what I been wantin?

He grasped the flask and drank with great eager gulps until it was
empty. Then he sat down against the cabin wall, staring fixedly at
the candle flame. The empty, sheepish, cowardly face began to gain
expression as the liquor mounted to his head. A light of fearlessness
began to grow in his eyes. Lines appeared and deepened in his thin
face, suggesting at once a certain degree of mastery and infinite
malevolence. The wolf that lurks somewhere in the fastness of every
mans soul had come forth and routed the sheep.

What in thunder you doin with all that heavy artillery hangin
to you, Hank? Take em off! I dont need no guards. Who said I was
thinkin of breakin camp? I haint tryin to run, am I? Damn me,
Im glad I done it and Im a-goin to walk right straight into hell
a-grinnin! Sheep, am I?

The little man laughed a strange laugh that had the snarl of a mad wolf
in it; a moment since he had been bleating like a scared lamb.

You set there and listen. Sheep, sheep, sheep! Thats what they all
been a-callin me, but when I get done tellin you about it, I guess
you wont call me no sheep. Haint a danged one of you big fellers as
would ve done it up better n me!

Youve knowed me quite a spell, Hank; and you never knowed no bad of
me till now, did you? And I haint had any easy trail most of the time
neither. When I was jest a little feller goin to country school back
East, the other fellers always picked onto me cause I was so easy to
pick onto. Never had a fight in my life. Always scared to death of
fightin; sucked it in with my mothers milk, I guess. Used to get off
alone and bawl cause I couldnt make myself fight.

Never was a real boy; always a kind of a stray sheep, bleatin around
in lonesome places. Guess I must look like a sheep; anyway the boys
called me that; and it stuck. Pretty hard bein a sheep amongst wolves,
Hank!

I was always shy and easy scared, Hank. I never owned it to a livin
man before; but a man is like to say things just before he goes out for
good that he wouldnt say before.

You knowed ol man Leclerc, didnt you? _Her_ dad, you know. Used to
live down-river half a days hard walkin. I reckon that ol man was
about the best friend I ever had, ceptin you, Hank. Kind of seemed to
understand me like. Wonder if hes hearin me now! Dont give a damn if
he is! He knowed it wasnt in me to be bad, and he knows I done right.
I tell you, Hank, I aint scared, nor shamed nor nothin. Damn me, I
can see Donahan a-dyin yet, and it does me good, Hank! Does me good!

The little mans eyes blazed, and his face seemed to take fire from
them. But the light died as quickly as it was kindled, like a fire
in too little fuel whipped by a wind too strong. A soft light of
reminiscence lingered where the fiercer glow had died.

Used to go down there pretty often when I could; part to see the ol
man, and most to see his girl. Nice little thing, Hank; awful nice
little thing! Dont you think so? Good as an angel, too, but weak like
a woman can be. I haint nothin again her, Hankso help me God, I
haint! I wasnt the man for her. Shed ought to ve had a big, strong,
quiet feller what wasnt afraid of the devil. Some feller like you,
Hankor Donahan.

Oh, let the hottest fires in hell eat Donahan!

The little man shook with a passion that seemed grotesque, because it
was too big for him.

And I kep goin down there, and goin down there, till I begun to
be happy, Hank. Begun to thinkin part of this world was made for me.
Begun to thinkin about havin a woman and babies; and somehow I got to
feelin bigger and stronger, and not sneakin any more.

Peared like the girl liked me. Never had nothin to do with no woman
cept my mother, you know. Oh, Hank, why cant a feller be a man when
he wants to so bad? I dunno. I tried.

Well, one time I went down there and ol man Leclerc was pretty sick.
Said he was a-goin to die sure thing. Wheezin already and pickin
at the blankets. Calls me up to him, and after he got done tellin me
what he was goin to do drectly, he says: Sheep, my boy, Ive brought
her up as near like a French lady as I knowed how. She haint able to
hustle for herself, andwell, aint she a pretty girl? Why the devil
dont you ask me for her?

And I asked, and the ol man said yes, and that was his last word,
cept God be with both of you. Took all his breath to say that,
seemed like.

And so I saw the ol man under ground and come up here with the girl.
Got the missionary, Father Donahan, to do the tyin. (Oh, damn him!)
And then I begun to be happy. Seemed like God heard the ol man for a
spell, tho his voice was weak when he said it. Now I guess mebbe he
didnt hear. Does he always hear, Hank?

Dunno, muttered the big man, who sat with his face in his hands;
seems like He aint out here t all, sometimes.

Oh, shut up, will you? peevishly snapped the little man. Le me
talk! _You_ got plenty of time for talkin! Le _me_ talk, will you?

The big man sighed, and the other continued rapidly in a sort of a
dazed sing-song voice with little inflection in it, like a man in a
trance.

Big change come over me then; better man all round. Factor saw it and
sent me on some long trips; seemed to trust me moren before. But I
always done the longest trips in the shortest possble time. Doted on
that girl wife, and I guess I was about the happiest feller that ever
cussed a pack mule. Used to like to set around the cabin when I could
and watch her skip about the place makin things comfortble like a
woman can when shes a mind.

And by and by I was happiern ever. That was when the little boy come.
Cute little feller, that boy was. Dont you mind? Had blue eyes, and
that tickled me half to death, cause black eyes is the rule in my
fambly and hers, and it seemed like God was tryin to be kind to me.

When Father Donahan christened the youngn, I drawed his attention to
them blue eyes and Donahan (no, I aint goin to call him Father no
more, cause if he was a priest, he was a priest of the devil!) What
was I sayin?

At the sound of Donahans name upon his own lips, the little mans face
writhed into malevolent contortions.

What was I sayin? he repeated dazedly.

Blue eyes, suggested Hank.

Quit breakin in onto me that away! snapped the little man peevishly.
And when I showed him the blue eyes, Donahan grinned and said, Yes,
God had been very kind. And it did look like it, didnt it?

Donahan named the boy; asked me if Id let him. Called him James for a
front name and Donahan for a middle one. Well, things went along smooth
until one day the little feller died. Made me feel pretty badlike to
tore my heart out. But Donahan he come and cried too, and that helped.
Always helps to have somebody feel bad with you; dont you think so?

After that things dragged on like they have a way of doin. I kep
on tryin to be like a man. But the girl, she seemed to be takin it
pretty hard. Got stranger and stranger toward me, like as if she didnt
care for me no more. Donahan used to come in often and console her, and
she seemed to brighten up at them timescause she was always strong on
the religion business. Thats what made her so good, I guess.

But by and by there was goin to be another youngster, and I kind of
got into the way of whistlin again somehow. Got to thinkin how itd
be a boy with blue eyes like the one that died. About that time the
Factor sent me off on a long trip. Hated to go, but it couldnt be
helped. Youd ought to seen me travel, Hank! Wantin to get back, you
know; feared all the time mebbe she was sick and a-wantin me. Made a
quick tripquickern most big men could, Hank. And when I come in sight
of home, I was that glad that I couldnt feel my feet and legs achin.

It was night when I got back, and I thought Id just take a peep in at
the winder before I went in; light was shinin out so home-like. You
know how a boy looks a long time at a big, red apple before he eats it;
gettin his eyes full of it before he fills his belly? That was like me.

I crep up and looked in; winder was raised a little. I could see
Donahan inside and he was talkin soft and low.

Hope itll have blue eyes, he was sayin; blue eyes like mine. And
that made me love Donahan more, cause it was just what I was a-wishin
myself. Talked along quite a spell, and me watchin outside, all the
time pityin Donahan cause he couldnt never have no little woman like
that and a youngster with blue eyes.

And the talkin growed into a mumble and hum like as if I was
a-dreamin it all in a happy dream; until all to oncet some of the
words leaped out of the hum, and stood out clear like so many candle
flames a-burnin into my head, and a-scorchin my backbone, and
a-settin the whole world afire with bloody light.

I held onto the winder sill to keep from fallin down, and this is
what I heard: Sometimes I feel sorry for the pore sheep; and Ive
spent many nights prayin to God about it and askin him to forgive me.
Then when I see you again, it all comes back and the prayers are no
more than so many curses. Whatd you ever marry that sheep for? Curse
the day that I was made a priest!

And then the words seemed to get muffled, only now and then I could
hear some of em plain, and every one of em was like a big mans fist
drivin into my face and a-beatin my eyes full of blood.

The little man covered his face with his hands and sobbed.

O, I aint a-blamin her, Hank, he blubbered. Never was a better
woman. I aint blamin her.

He rocked himself back and forth for some time. His sobbing ceased.
Suddenly he raised his face and the flames of hell glittered in his
tear-washed eyes.

Im a white-livered coward, so I didnt go in and kill him. He was
a big man, and I aint no fighter. I run; dont know why. Didnt
feel sore nor achy in my legs no more. I run and run and run till my
breath give out, then I fell down and the stars swum round and went
out. Then after awhile I was up and walkin, and nothin would stand
still. Things danced round and round me and the air was full of little
spiteful, spittin lights and sounds like devils a-laughin. And by
and by I come to ol man Leclercs place. Dont know why I went there.
Nothin there but the _place_.

I went in and laid down on the floor all broke up. And when I went to
sleep, I dreamed of killin Donahan. I woke up and it was mornin.

First thing I heard was the rattle of some Red River carts goin
north. I guess it was the devil that whispered somethin in my ear
then. I run out and told a big lie to the bull-whackers. Man a-dyin
in here! Go as fast as you can to the next post and tell Father Donahan
to come down to see the pore devil through with it!

Guess I looked like Id been settin up for a week, so the
bull-whackers believed it and went on north a-whackin their bulls into
a swingin trot.

Well, Donahan come all right.

Here the little man lapsed into a stubborn silence. He leaned against
the wall and for several hours there was no sound in the cabin but that
of heavy breathing.

At length Hank got up and walked over to the little window. A dull grey
blur had grown up in the East. It would soon be time. Hank sighed.

Suddenly the little man was aroused from his lethargy as though he had
heard a shout. He began talking rapidly.

I stood behind the door of the cabin, and when he come in I downed
him with a club. Then I tied his hands and his feet and fastened him
to the floor. I sat beside him and spit in his face till he come to
a-groanin. And it was a couple days before he could talk sense or
knowed who I was.

And he begged and he cussed, but I didnt say nothin. He got hungry;
so I chawed at some pemmican I had left from the trip sos hed get
hungrier. He got thirsty; so I drank moren I wanted sos hed get
thirstier.

Said hed get me into heaven for just one sup of water; so I went out
with my cup; I filled it with dust; I put it to his lips.

Said hed send me to hell if I didnt give him just one drop. So I
give him more dust. And by and by he got luny like, and cussed like a
bull-whacker and whined like a sick woman by turns.

God, Hank! How that man hung on!

And by and by he seemed to get a little sense for a spell, and he
yelled out: _He had blue eyes, didnt he? Look at mine!_ And I cuffed
him in the mouth till his teeth was bloody, cause his eyes was blue.

The little man hesitated. Suddenly an expression of supreme terror came
over his face. The wolf was deadthe frightened sheep looked out of his
eyes. There was a sound of footsteps. The shabby light of early dawn
had already cheapened the glow of the guttered candle.

The door openeda priest entered.

The little man gave a yell of terror and shrank into his corner.

_Take it away, Hank!_ he screamed. _Take it away!_

Hank spoke a few words into the ear of the priest, who muttered a
prayer and went out. For some time the little man stared appealingly
into the eyes of the bigger man. When he spoke his voice was husky and
low: Wont you look after the woman a little, Hank? If its got blue
eyes

There was now a sound of other footsteps approaching. The little man
gasped like one who has suddenly been thrust into cold water.

Oh, Hank! he moaned; hold me tight. Dont let em take me! Theyll
stand me in the cart under a tree and theyll put the rope around my
neck and theyll drag the cart away! _Oh!_

The footsteps were now very near the door. The little man on a sudden
became very quiet. He bit nervously at his finger-tips. His body
stiffened. His face seemed transparent.

When the sound of a hand at the latch was heard, his jaw dropped
nervelessly. He stared upon the soon-to-be-opened door with wide,
dilated eyes, in which all that had been human was burned to dust.




XII

THE MARK OF SHAME


IN the old times there were two brothers, Seha and Ishneda; and because
of hate for him, they did many acts of unkindness to a man whose name
was Shonga Saba.

And one night a man was killed and the man was Ishneda. So with the
coming of the light, a whisper ran about the village, saying Shonga
Saba has killed. And the whisper was true; for Shonga Saba sat in his
lodge all day, speaking no word. And when any came to speak, he lifted
his lip in a bad way and snarled. A sick wolf does so.

It happened that morning that some hunters went forth, for it was the
time for the hunting of bison and the tribe was resting on the trail.
And when the hunters returned, their eyes were like the eyes of a
scared deer. They told a story that frightened the people. They had
shot at three elk and their aim was true; but the arrows came out on
the other sidebloodless. And the elk changed into wolves, running away
very swiftly.

So they who were wise saw famine coming. They recalled old times; how
the game had often failed after a murder. For the spirit of the dead
man makes it so. And the wise old men told these things, and the old
women said it had been so; they remembered.

So there was a space of little speaking, for Fear sat upon tongues.

When the sun was going down, the people gathered about the big chiefs
tepee where the fathers were sitting with great thoughts. They did not
smoke nor talk. They shivered as the long shadows crept out of the
hillsyet it was the brown hot time.

And when it was dusk a chief made words which were whispers: Let a
_wachoobay_ [holy man] take strong weapons and travel the back trail
till the middle of the night, that he may meet the spirit that comes
and kill it; for Famine walks with the spirit that comes, and there
shall be the wailing of children and many flat bellies.

And the _wachoobay_ went forth with strong weapons. He took the back
trail; he looked straight ahead. And the people stared after him until
the dark came between, as he walked to meet the two comers.

Then the chiefs voice went over the people in the darkness, for
the fires were not lit; an enemy was coming, and there is safety in
darkness: Let him who killed come among us. So one went and brought
the man.

He stood among the people, felt but not seen; and with him came a
sobbing that grew into words: I, Shonga Saba, am here; and I have
killed. Have my people seen a bison bull stung with a fly until he
tore the earth with his horns? It was so. After a long time of heat the
storm comes out of the night; it does angry deeds, and in the morning
it is past. It was so. My breast aches. I struck my enemy, but myself I
struck also. Something has died within me. So I go to do as the others
have done. I will take the punishment.

And though the people did not hear nor see him go, they knew that he
was gone. That night only the children slept.

When Shonga Saba reached his tepee, he did that which was the custom.
He cut his hair, he took off his garments, he smeared his forehead with
mud. Of tears and dust he made the mud. Upon his forehead he put the
mark of his shame.

From the peak of his tepee, where the smoke comes out, he tore the
rawhide flap. It was blackened with the smoke of many fires. About his
shoulders he bound it; and it was the garment of his shame.

And then he went forth from the camp. He pitched a lonesome tepee
without the circle of his people; for thus he should live four summers
and four winters. It was the custom.

And in the first light his woman came to him with water and cooked
meat. Also, she brought moaning. Shonga Saba spoke no word nor looked
up. The mud of tears and dust was upon his forehead, and the blackened
garment of shame was upon his shoulders. There was a lump in his
throat; but the water did not wash it away. There was an emptiness in
him; but the meat did not fill it. And when he cut the meat, which was
well cooked, the man groaned, for blood ran forth and made the food
look like a wound.

Again the tribe took up the trail; they wanted to find the bison, for
there was little meat. And the man followed at the distance of an
arrows flight behind his moving people, for such was the custom. But
no thunder of bison came from the brown valleys where the trail went;
neither was there any dust cloud of pawing hoofs. And the old women
remembered old-time famines, and their hands trembled as they pitched
the tepees in the dusk that ended the days toil.

And in the mornings the old men gazed into the shining distance,
looking from under their hands with eyes that glared as in battle. And
all day, sweating and toiling on the trail, the people ate the distance
with hungry eyes.

Round bellies flattened; for the evil days had come.

And the man who had killed saw all this. He too walked with hunger and
something bigger than the food-wish. Also lonesomeness was ever by his
side. In the nights he felt the mark upon his forehead like the sting
of an angry knife; and the smoke-flap was as a fire upon his shoulders.

And one night he said: I have brought these days of toiling without
food upon my people. It was for this that my mother groaned at my
coming. I should have been the food of wolves on that day when my eyes
were not yet open. I will go away, for evil walks with me, and my feet
scatter trouble in the trail. My woman is as one who has no man, and my
children are as a strangers children. I will walk far and seek peace
among other peoples, among strange hills and valleys.

And he went in the night.

He was far into the lonesome placesand it was morning. He was weak
with the night walking, for famine had made him thin. So he lifted his
face and his hands to the sun. His palms he turned to the young light
and he spoke earnest words to the Spirit: Wakunda, trouble have I met,
and trouble have my people met through me. Help me to walk in the good
trail!

And as he said the words, a cloud passed across the sun; it was like
a smutch of mud across a shining forehead. The man who had killed,
groaned. He hid his face in the grass that he might not see the mark of
his shame. But as the day grew older the hunger pinched more, and the
man got up, set his face away from the sun, and went on further into
the lonesome places. And in the evening he killed a rabbit with his bow
and arrows. And as the rabbit leaped up at the sting of the arrow, it
made a pitiful sound like that of a man struck deep with a knife in his
sleep.

And the man fled, for a strange sickness had gripped him. The mark
upon his forehead burned, and the smoke-flap was as a heavy burden upon
his shoulders.

In the last light he found wild turnips and ate. They could not cry
out; they could not bleed. And then sleep came, but not rest. While his
body slept, his spirit killed Ishneda over and over again. And he saw
the first light with haggard eyes.

And when he had eaten again of the wild turnips he said: I will go
to the village of the Poncas; they will take me in, for I will speak
soft words. That day he travelled, and the next and the next. But two
others had travelled faster than heFamine and the Story of his bad
deed; for none travel so fast as these. And these two had travelled
across the prairie together.

And after much walking, Shonga Saba came to the top of a hill and
turned hungry eyes upon the Ponca village in the valley. It was the
time when the old day throws big shadows. He stood thin, bent against
the sky. The smoke-flap at his shoulders lifted in the wind that the
eyes in the valley might see.

And a dead hush crept over the village; the sound of children died; the
people disappeared. Full of wonder and fear, the lean, lonesome one
walked with halting step down the dry hillside. He entered the village,
and it was as a place where all are dead.

He came to the centre of the village. He lifted his palms and made a
piteous cry, which was like a dry wind moving in a wilderness. And
then the head of an old man was thrust forth from a tent-flap, and from
it came a husky voice: Begone, O Bringer of Famine!

And the man went forth. His head was bent, his shoulders stooped as
with a weight. He walked far and met the Night. He lay down in its
shadow. His forehead ached, and the smoke-flap was as a burning brand.
And in the darkness he made a cry: Wakunda, very far have I walked
seeking peace; but it has fled before me. Help me to find the good
trail!

He was very tired, and on a sudden it was day again, and the dew was
upon him. He found wild turnips and ate. He drank at a little creek
that ran very thin among dying reeds. Then he walked, he knew not
where. But now and then he whispered bitter words into the lonesome
air: In the land of the spirits is peace; there I would walk, but I
cannot find the trail.

The day was very hot. The prairie wavered in the heat; the bugs droned;
the light wind sighed in the dry grasses like a thirsty thing. The
far hills seemed floating in a lake of thin oil. They looked lean and
hungry, yellow as with a fever; and upon their sides the dry earth was
broken like old sores.

Into the heat-drone the man sent his sighing. His feet were heavy; he
wished to die, he wished to die.

And when the day was past the highest place, a rumbling grew below the
rim of the earth, like the galloping of many bisona sound of anger.
And a cloud arose, black and flashing with fires across its front. The
sky was as an eye of fever and the cloud closed slowly over it like a
big eyelid.

Then a hush fell. There was no moving of air, no droning of bugs. The
prairie held its breath; and the cloud came on. It moved in silence. It
threw long, ragged arms ahead of it, long, eager arms. And out of it
leaped flames, like the spurt and sputter of a wind-blown camp fire in
the night.

And in the hush the man heard strange sounds on a sudden. There was
a crying and a shouting of battle cries. He reached the bald top of
a hill and saw below him a fighting of many warriors. Bitterly they
fought, as wolves fight in hunger. There was the lifting and falling
of war clubs, the shrieking of arrows. Sounds of horror cut the big
stillness like many knives.

And the mans heart leaped with joyfor here was death; this was the
beginning of the trail that led to peace.

With a cry he rushed from the summit. He ran with very young legs to
meet Death, for he wished to die.

But on a sudden the warring bands ceased crying. The war clubs were
not lifted, the arrows flew no more. On rushed the thin, bent runner
from the hilltop, and the smoke-flap flaunted itself behind him. As in
a dream the warriors stared upon the wild runner. Then a hoarse shout
went up: The Famine Bringer! The Famine Bringer! Stricken with a
common fear, they fled. And the storm broke upon the valley. It poured
down water and fire upon one who lay there upon his face. It roared, it
shrieked, it flamed about him; but he moved not.

His breast ached with the ache of the lonesome, for even Death had fled
him. And when the storm had passed, the stillness came back like a new
pain. The drenched man arose and saw the blood-red sun slip down a
ridge of steaming hills.

And near him lay one who had been killed with an arrow. The feathers
stood forth from his breast. His face had the look of much pain; his
hands gripped at the wet grass. And the lonesome one looked long upon
the dead man, thinking deep thoughts. Even the dead have pain, he
said, and they seek to hold to the good earth. See how he clutches it!
I shall live and follow my trail, for on all trails there is pain; and
Wakunda wishes me to live.

So he dressed himself in the garments of the dead warrior who needed
them no more. He threw away the smoke-flap, and in a gully that roared
with rapid waters, he washed the smutch from his foreheadthe mud of
dust and tears. And he said: Now will I walk straight again, for the
marks of my shame are gone. I will seek the Otoes, and they will take
me in.

Is it not the way of a man to seek better things?

And it happened that in the village of the Otoes was much joy and much
feasting. For the bison had come back; the famine was ended.

And it was dark. The lonesome one sighted the feast fires from far
off and caught the far-blown scent of boiling kettles. They had the
home-smell. His heart was glad as he entered the village and went in
among the feast fires. And they about the fires said: Who walks in
from the night? And Shonga Saba said: A lonesome man, one with many
stories to tell.

They sat him down, for stories are good with feasting. And he told a
story while the meat went round and the kettles simmered and the embers
crackled and went blue. And as he told, the people gathered close about
to hear. They leaned forward, they breathed heavily, they stared. For
his story was of a brave one who suffered much; it sounded true; there
was an ache in his words. Also it had in it the muttering of war drums,
the wails of women in the night, the snarl of bow thongs, the beat of
hoofs.

But as the teller raised his face, glowing with the noble deeds of
which he told, he saw the circled mass of staring faces, moulded with
the terrors of the tale and lit blue with falling embers.

What did they see that they stared so? _The mark!_

The story-teller leaped to his feet. As a wounded man he cried out: It
is not washed away! He threw his arms across his forehead and fled
through the parting throng into the night.

And when he had run far from something that followed yet made no sound,
he cast himself down on the prairie and cried to the Spirit: Wakunda,
with water I washed it away, but it is not gone! Am I a wolf to howl
always in the wilderness? I have the ache for home. I wish to hear
laughter and be clean. Help me to find the trail!

All night his words felt about in the dark for Wakunda.

The next day his wanderings began anew. And after many sunlights the
first frost gripped the prairie, and the snows came. More and more the
lonesome one thought of the fires of his people. Through the shivering
nights the tang of the home-smoke filled his nostrils; and day by day
the homeache grew.

So his weary feet followed his longing, and the trail led home. But
there was no greeting. In an empty lodge without the village he made a
fire that held the winter off but left him shivering. And once again
his woman came with sobbing and a downcast face, bringing water and
meat. He ate and drank, yet thirst and hunger stayed. In the nights he
looked wistfully upon the fires of his people burning little days out
of the darkness. He wished to be beside them and hear the laughter, for
the famine had passed, and there was joy.

And often by day, Seha, the brother of the man who was killed, came
with taunting and words that wounded as a whip-thong. But the lonesome
one made no answer, for having suffered much, he was wise. And this
was against the law of the fathers; so it happened one day that Seha
was bound to a post in the centre of the village, and the whippers were
there with elkhorn whips to punish Seha.

Then was a strange deed done, which even yet the old men tell of to
the youths. From his lodge ran the lonesome one and stood before the
whippers. The long silence he broke with words: Spare Seha and bind me
to the post, for mine was the bad deed. I have suffered much and now I
can see.

And the old fathers, who were wise, said: Let it be as the man says.
And it was done. The lonesome one was bound to the post and took the
lashes on his back. He made no cry, nor was there any wincing of his
face. And it happened that in his pain he sought out the face of Seha
in the throng. It was no longer hard with hate.

And then, suddenly, as the whips hissed about him, a light went across
the face of the lonesome onea strange, bright light. And seeing this,
the arms of the whippers faltered, for it was very strange.

Then in the silence that fell, the man raised a soft voice: At last
the mark has left me! Bring my children to look upon me, and let my
woman sing! I have found peace; for the mark of tears and dust is
goneI know not how.




XIII

THE BEATING OF THE WAR DRUMS


HE could never be a strong _waschusha_ (brave). When he was born he
was no bigger than a baby coyote littered in a terrible winter after a
summer of famine! That was what the braves said as they sat in a circle
about the fires; and often one would catch him, spanning his little
brown legs with a contemptuous forefinger and thumb, while the others
made much loud mirth over this bronze mite who could never be a brave.

Then the object of their mirth would pull away from his tormentors,
displaying his teeth with a whimper that was half a growl, and would
slink away into the shades where the firelight did not reach. Whereupon
the braves would call after him in their good-natured cruelty: Mixa
Zhinga! Mixa Zhinga! (Little Wolf).

So, in accordance with certain infallible psychic laws, Little Wolf
became what he was considered, and fulfilled his wild name to the
letter.

One day in one of his most vulpine moods, while trotting among the
hills on all fours, stopping now and then to sit upon his haunches
and give forth a series of howls in imitation of his namesakes, he
had discovered a deserted wolfs hole in the hillside, of which he
immediately made himself the growling possessor.

To make this play metempsychosis the more real, he had spirited from
the tepee of his father a complete wolfs hide, clad in which he spent
the greater part of the time prowling about among the hills with an
intense wolfish hate for all humankind gnawing at his heart.

One summer evening Little Wolf, sitting upon the top of the hill, gazed
down upon the circle of tepees which was the village of his people. As
he looked, the silent vow he had taken, never to go back to his tribe
again, but to be a wolf with the wolves, slowly became shapeless, then
indistinct, then it vanished altogether. For the smoke, rising slowly
from the various fires, told a bewitching tale of supper to his eyes;
and the light wind brought to his keen nostrils the scent of boiling
kettles, which acted as a sort of footnote to the tale of the smoke,
finally clinching the argument of the text!

So the little wolf fell from his high resolve as the wolf skin fell
from his back, and he forthwith trotted down the hillside, at every
step degenerating, as he thought, into just a common _zhinga zhinga_
(baby).

Having cautiously approached a fire, Little Wolf sat upon the ground
with his knees huddled up to his chin, and watched the deft hands of
the women tending the baking of the squaw corn cakes and the yellow
_watuh_ (pumpkin) in the embers.

The old women, their backs bent with their loads, carried bundles
of faggots from a thicket near by and placed them upon the fires,
that flared up with a sound like the winds, making a small circular
day amid the gathering shadows. The air was pleasant with the scent
of boiling kettles, some filled with the meat of the _tae_ or the
_tachuga_ (bison and antelope); some ebullient with the savoury _zhew
munka_, the tea of the prairie. And as Little Wolf sat and looked upon
the suggestive scene, a great wave of sympathetic kindness passed
through his small body.

And especially did the wolfishness of his little heart melt into an
indefinite feeling of love for humanity as his eyes followed the form
of the maiden Hinnagi as she bustled with her mother about the kettles.
Already in his childish mind he was wielding the stone axe with mighty
force in some mysterious battle among the hills; and it was all for
her. His eyes grew big with the dream he was dreaming. He stared into
the fire as he thought the thoughts of ambitious youth.

The flame fell and crept into the embers. Then reality came back as the
shadows came. Something of the wonted wolfishness tugged at his heart
as he thought of what the braves had said. He could never be a strong
brave! With an awful bitterness this thought grew upon him, and even a
full stomach could not quite ease the pang.

After the evening meal the war drums were brought into the open space
about which the tepees were built. For upon the morrow the entire band
of the tribes warriors would go out against their enemies, the Sioux,
and to-night they would dance the war dance that their courage might
not fail.

The drums were placed in a small circle; before each an old man, who
had seen many battles ere the eagle glance faded from his eye, sat
cross-legged, holding a drumstick in either hand. About these the
braves gathered in a larger circle. The yellow and red light of the
boisterous camp fires made more terrible their faces fierce with the
war paint.

In another circle at some distance from that of the braves, awaited
the women, dressed in their brightest garments of dyed buckskin. At a
signal from the head chief of the tribe, the snarling thunder of the
war drums began. The two motionless circles suddenly became two rings
of gyrating colour. The beaded moccasins twinkled like a chain of
satellites swinging about the faggot fire for a sun. The shout of the
braves arose above the cadence of the drum beats, and the monotonous
song of the women grew like a night wind in a lonesome valley.

Tum-tum-um-um, tum-tum-um-um, went the drums, ever faster, ever louder,
inciting the dancers to delirious fury. The neglected fires dwindled
into embers. The shout of the braves and the droning of the women
ceased. Darkness fell upon the circles. The dancers moved swiftly
through the dusk like ghosts in a midnight orgy. There was no sound
save the snarling beat of the drums and the shuffle of wild feet.

Then the moon, big-eyed with wonder, arose above the hills, pouring a
weird light upon the dance. Little Wolf, who had been huddling closely
against a tepee with an unintelligible fear, now felt the delirium of
the dance for the first time. He leaped to his feet with a shout that
echoed strange and hoarse from the hills! The whole village, as if
awakened from the spell, caught up the cry and sent it trembling up the
gulches!

With the hot blood pounding at his temples, Little Wolf swung into the
frenzy of the dance. He leaped like the antelope when it catches the
scent of the hunter. He was no longer the _zhinga zhinga_ who could
never be a brave. The fanaticism of the savage was upon him. With his
head thrown back until it caught the full glare of the moon, he danced.
It was not a childs face that the pale light struck; it was the face
of a fiend! The unfettered wind of the prairie was in his lungs! The
swiftness of the elk was in his feet! He danced until the hills danced
about him in a dance of their own. He danced until the moon reeled like
a sick man! He danced until his chest felt crushed as with the hug of
a grizzly! He danced until the stars and the moon went out, and there
was nothing but darkness and a deep, deep oppressive something, like
and unlike slumber, upon him! The sun was far up in the heavens when he
awoke lying upon the ground where he had fallen with fatigue. He rubbed
his eyes and stared about him; the circles of the dance had vanished;
the war drums were still. The warriors had ridden out of the village
into the mysterious region beyond the hills where great deeds awaited
to be done. Only the women and the children and the old men remained in
the village.

Then there came upon Little Wolf that overpowering thought of
bitterness. He was only a _zhinga zhinga_; he could never be a brave.
No, but he would be a wolf! He would live in howling loneliness among
the hills!

Yet that day as he prowled about, clad in his wolf skin, he was
conscious of not being half so good a wolf as he had been the day
before. He did not find it quite within his power to hate his people
with whom he had felt the delirium of the war dance. The snarling beat
of the war drums had awakened in him a vital interest in the great
prairie tragedy of food-getting and war-making.

Several days passed, and the warriors had not returned. Little Wolf
was sitting beside the deserted hole which was his den, thinking great
thoughts of the future as he basked in the horizontal glare of the
evening sun. As he looked with half-shut eyes across the hills, his
dreaming was suddenly arrested by the sight of what seemed a number of
bunches of grass moving along the brow of the hill on the other side
of the valley in which the village lay. As he looked and wondered at
this fantastic dance of the grasses, there was a wild shout from the
opposite hill, and a small band of Otoes, their heads covered with
grass that they might the more easily creep upon their foes, rushed
down the hillside toward the defenceless village.

Terrified by the suddenness of the attack, Little Wolf scampered into
his hole like any other little wolf, and crouched in the darkness
shivering with fear. Some time passed, during which he could hear the
wail of the women and the victorious cries of the Otoes; then the
noises ceased. With a great pang of remorse, the consciousness of his
cowardice came upon Little Wolf. He had crawled into a hole like a
badger!

Then he thought of Hinnagi.

He crawled out of the hole and ran down the hill into the village with
his wolf skin still upon him. There amid the tepees he saw the bodies
of some of the old men who had attempted resistance, but the time of
their strength was passed.

Hinnagi! Hinnagi! called Little Wolf. He listened, and heard only the
wail of the women from the lodges.

It was the custom of the Otoes to carry off the fairest daughters of
the enemy as the spoil of war. Little Wolf thought of this with a great
pang at his heart. A great indefinite resolve of heroism came upon
him. He ran out of the village and down the valley, keeping the trail
of the enemy. When he had gone some distance, he came upon some ponies
that the Otoes had abandoned for the fresher ones from the herds of the
Omahas.

Catching one of these, weary with a long trail, he mounted it and
turned its head down the trail of the Otoes, urging its weary limbs
into a gallop by plying his heels upon its ribs.

The shades of the valley crept slowly up the hills and the golden glow
faded from the summits. Little Wolf still urged the stumbling pony
through the darkness. As he rode, the frenzy that he had felt in the
war dance rushed through him. His temples beat and his heart throbbed
to the time of the snarling drums. To him the night breeze seemed heavy
with noble deeds awaiting to be given life and voices of thunder for
the ears of men.

He felt that in some indefinite way he would now become a strong
_waschusha_! The Otoes had stolen the ponies and the women; ah, that
included Hinnagi! He would save them; little did he know how, yet
he felt that he would save them. Then the braves would not laugh at
him any more, but would let him ride to battle with them. And maybe
sometime Hinnagi would be his squaw!

Suddenly rounding the base of a hill, the pony stopped short and
pricked up its ears, sniffing the wind that came up the gulch. Little
Wolf, aroused from his musing, soon understood the abruptness of the
pony. He smelled smoke! Slipping to the ground he crawled on his hands
and knees up the gulch in the direction from which the scent of the
smoke came.

Soon he reached the end of the gulch and, looking into a small valley,
he saw through the gloom a number of rudely constructed tepees.
Breathlessly he listened. For awhile there was no sound except the
crackling of the low fires and the flap of the blankets about the
poles. Then as he listened, there came to his ears a low, mournful wail
as of a night wind in the scrub oaks of a bluff.

Having satisfied himself that the Otoes slept soundly, Little Wolf
crawled in the direction of the wail and disappeared in the gloom.

Some moments afterward, an Otoe brave suddenly awoke from his heavy
slumber. In the weird glow of the falling fire he beheld at the
entrance of his tepee a grey wolf standing motionless.

The brave raised himself upon his elbow, uttering a grunt of terror
as of one who feels a nightmare and would cry out were not his tongue
frozen in his mouth.

The wolf with a startled movement whispered hoarsely in the Omaha
tongue: The Omahas! They are coming! Fly! Fly!

The Otoe brave leaped to his feet, every limb growing cold with fright.
He rubbed his eyes and stared at the darkness. The wolf had vanished.

Now an Indian believes weird things, and the warning of a talking wolf
was not a thing to be despised even though it were only dreamed. So the
Otoe brave gave a shout that rang up the gulch and made the grazing
ponies snort and tug at their lariats.

Soon the entire band was rushing about the camp.

The Omahas! They are coming! cried the startled brave. Fly! Fly! For
lo, a grey wolf came to my tepee and spoke to me in a dream!

Fly! Fly! echoed the whole band, delirious with fear. Kill the
squaws! they shouted; for in their flight they could not be burdened
with their spoils, and they would not leave them to their enemies.

There was the sound of the shrieks of women; then the galloping of
hoofs; then silence.

Two days afterward the Omahas, having returned to their stricken
village, made the trail of the fleeing Otoes thunderous with pursuing
hoofs. Suddenly topping the hill that overlooked the deserted camp of
their enemies, they beheld the bodies of the slain women strewn amid
the tepees. Over one of these a grey wolf stood.

There was a shout from the foremost of the Omaha warriors, and a dozen
arrows sang in the air and quivered in the body of the wolf. It rolled
upon its side with a cry half human!

A group of braves, riding up to the corpse of the woman, pulled the
blanket from its face.

It was Hinnagi!

With a savage kick one turned the still quivering body of the wolf upon
its back. The grey hide fell from an emaciated brown face, twitching
with the agony of death.

It was Little Wolf!




XIV

DREAMS ARE WISER THAN MEN


RAIN WALKER lay upon the brown grass without the circle of the village;
and it was the time when the maize is gatheredthe brown, drear time.
He lay with ear pressed to the earth.

What are you doing? asked one who walked there.

I? said Rain Walker; and his eyes and face were not good to see as he
raised his head. The dying time seemed also in his face. The growers
are coming up, and I am listening to their breathing, he said.

And the questioner walked on with a strange smile; for it was not the
time of the coming of the growers.

Rain Walker stood in the centre of the village and held his face to the
sky.

What are you doing? said one who walked there.

I? and there was twilight in Rain Walkers eyes as he looked upon the
questioner. I shot an arrow into the air. It did not come back, so I
am always looking for it.

And the questioner smiled and went on walking; for no arrow rises that
does not fall. A child knows that.

And the people said: It is all because Mad Buffalo, the Ponca, took
his squaw. He took her, and she went. It was after the summers
feasting and talking together that she went. Rain Walker is not
forgetting.

And Rain Walker sat much alone; he sat much alone making strange
songs not pleasant to hear. And as he made songs he made weapons. He
fashioned him a _man-de-hi_, which is a long spear, tipped with sharp
flint; and he sang. He wrought a _za-zi-man-di_, which is a great bow;
and sang all the time. They were hate songs that he sang; they snarled.

He shaped many arrows; he headed them with sharp flints and tipped
them with the feathers of the hawk; and all the time he sang. He made
a _we-ak-ga-di_, which is an ugly club. He sang to himself and to
the weapons that he made. To the harsh, snarling airs he wrought the
weapons. The songs went into them, and they looked like things that
might hate much.

And one drew near who was walking. Why do you make war things? said
he.

I? and Rain Walker threw himself upon his stomach, writhing toward
the questioner like a big snake. I am a rattlesnake, he said,
_hiss-ss-ss-s!_ go away! I sting!

And the man went, for it is not good to see a man act like a snake.

And one night the weapons were finished. All that night the people
heard the voice of Rain Walker singing. They said: Those are the songs
of one who wishes to go on the warpath!

And in the morning Rain Walker came out of his lodge. The squaws
trembled to see him; and the men wondered. For he had wept and his eyes
were pale. Well did the men know that he who weeps in hate is not a
child.

And Rain Walker raised a hoarse voice into the morning stillness before
all the people: Where is my womanshe who cooked for me and made my
lodge pleasant? Tell me; for I walk there that the crows may eat me!

The people shivered as though his voice were the breath of the first
frost.

You need not make words, my kinsmen; I know. I walk there and the
crows shall eat me.

He went forth from the door of his lodge and came to the place where
the head chief lived among the Hungas. He raised the door flap. A-ho!
said he, for the chief was within eating. I, Rain Walker, stand before
you. I have words to give.

Speak, said the chief.

I am wronged. I wish war! I wish to see the Poncas destroyed!

The head chief gazed long into the tear-washed eyes of Rain Walker, and
he said: It is a big thing to take that trail. It means the wailing of
women; it means hunger; it means the crying of _zhinga zhingas_ for
fathers that lie in lonesome places and never ride back. It is a hard
path to take. I will think.

And it happened after the thinking of the big chief that a council was
calleda coming-together of the leaders of the bands.

And the leaders came together, and sat with big thoughts. It was
evening, and among the assembled leaders sat Rain Walker. His face was
thin and cruel as a stone axe stained with blood.

Then the big chief raised his voice, and words to be heard grew there
in the big lodge. This man who sits with us has been wronged. When our
brothers, the Poncas, were among us for the feasting and the talking
together, Mad Buffalo was among them.

A woman is a thing not to be understood. Now she dies on long winter
trails for a man, or grows old and wrinkled suckling his _zhinga
zhingas_; and now she leaves him for another; yet it is the same woman.
I knew a wise man once; but he shook his head about these things; and
so do I.

You know of whom I speak. It was Sun Eyes; and she was this mans
woman. Mad Buffalo smiled, and she went with him.

Rain Walkers breath, that hissed through his teeth, filled up the
silence that followed. His face was thin and sharp and eager, even as
the barbed head of a war arrow.

And this man has come to me crying for war, continued the head chief.
Think hard, and let us talk together.

And he of the Big Elk band said: Let the Poncas come down in the night
and drive away our ponies, and I will gather my band about me. But it
has not been so.

And he of the Hawk band said: Let the Poncas destroy our gardens, and
I will think of my weapons.

And he of the No-Teeth band said: Let the Poncas speak ill of us, and
my band will put on the war paint.

Then a silence grew and the head chief filled it with few words. Let
us pass the pipe; and all who smoke it smoke for war.

And there were ten chiefs in the council, sitting in a circle. The
first touched the pipe lightly and passed it on as though it burned
his fingers; and so the second and third, even to the tenth. And next
to him sat Rain Walker. His breath came drily through his teeth, like
a hot wind in a parched gulch. With hands that trembled he grasped the
pipe from the tenth, who had not placed it to his lips. Rain Walker
placed it to his lips nervously, eagerly, as one who touches a cool
water bowl after a long thirst. He struck a flint and lit it. Then he
arose to his feet, tall, straight, tremblinga Rage grown into a man!

_I smoke!_ he cried; I smoke, and through all the sunlights that
come I shall walk alone and kill! The lonesome walkerI am he!

I shall speak to the snake, and he shall teach me his creeping and
his stinging. I shall speak to the elk, and he shall teach me his
fleetness, his strength that lasts, his fury when he turns to fight.
And I shall speak to the hawk and learn the keenness of his eyes!

Rain Walker puffed blue streamers of smoke into the still twilight of
the lodge, seeming something more than man in the fog he made.

I smoke! he cried; and his cry had changed into a song of snarling
sounds and sounds that wailed. I smoke, and I smoke alone; my brothers
will not take the pipe with me. In lonesome places shall I walk with
my hate, and not even the lone hawk in the furthest hills shall hear
me make aught but a hate cry. I have no longer any people! I am a
tribethe tribe that walks alone! The _zhinga zhingas_ of the women
that are not yet born shall hear my name, and it shall be like a
nightwind wailing when the spirits walk and the fires are blue! I will
forget that I am the son of a woman; I will think myself the son of a
snake, that bore me on a hot rock in a lonesome place. I will think
that I never tasted womans milk, but only venom stewed by the hot sun.
And now I walk alone.

His cry had fallen to a low wail that made the flesh of the hearers
creep, although they were leaders and brave. And with eyes that peered
far ahead as into impenetrable distances Rain Walker strode out of the
lodge. The night was coming; he went forth to meet it, walking.

As he walked toward the night his thoughts were of _choobay_ (holy)
things. He thought much of the spirits, and he reached a high hill
as he walked. It was high; therefore it was a _choobay_ place. And
he climbed to the summit, bare of grass and white with flaked rocks
against the sky, that darkened fast as the Night walked.

Then he lit his pipe and made _choobay_ smoke. He wished to have the
good _wakundas_ with him, even though he walked alone. For well he
knew that no man can walk quite alone. So he extended the pipe stem
to the west, the south, the east, the north, and he cried, O you who
cause the four winds to reach a place, help me! I stand needy! Then
he extended the pipe stem toward the earth, and he said, O Venerable
Man who lives at the bottom, here I stand needy! And to the heavens he
held the stem and cried, O Grandfather who lives above, I stand needy;
I, Rain Walker! Though my brothers treat me badly, yet I think you will
help me!

And he felt much stronger.

Then, with his weapons about him, he set his face to the south, for
there in the flat lands of Nebraska lay the village of the Poncas.

And he walked in lonesome places all night. A coyote trotted past him
and sat at some distance. O brother Coyote, said Rain Walker, I am
on the warpath; teach me your long running and your snapping! The
coyote whined and went into a gulch.

I walk alone, and none relieve my sorrow!

So sang Rain Walker; and singing thus he walked into the morning. And
the prairie was grey with frost and very big, and the skies were filled
with a quiet, so that a far crow cawing faintly made a shout. Having
nothing to eat he sang, and hunger went away. His song filled the
world, for he walked alone where it was very silent.

To the hawk he cried for keenness of eyes; but the hawk circled on and
was only a speck. Nothing heard the man who walked alone.

He killed a rabbit and ate; he found a stream and drank. Then he met
the Night walking again, and they walked together until they met the
Day; and the man saw below him in the flat lands of Nebraska the
jumbled mud village of the Poncas.

And it happened that the people in the village were moving very early.
There was a neighing of ponies and a shouting of men and a scolding and
laughing of women. It was the time of the bison hunt, and they were
going forth that day.

Rain Walker lay in the brown grass at the hilltop and watched with
wistful eyes the merry ones as the long, thin file left the village,
the riders and the walkers and the drags. It is pleasant to go on the
hunt. Rain Walker felt that he would never go again.

His face softened; then suddenly it changed and became again as
a barbed war arrow. Mad Buffalo rode, and after him went Sun Eyes
walking! Her head hung low like a thing wilted by the frost. She
laughed none; she, too, seemed as one who walked alone.

When the long, thin line, like a huge snake writhing westward into the
hills, had disappeared, Rain Walker got up and walked fast. He walked
fast, for he wished to be near the place of camping when the night
came. And it was so.

He lay at a distance, watching the fires flare into the night and
feeling very hungry, for he caught the scent of the boiling kettles.
They smelled like home. And when the people had eaten and the fires had
fallen, Rain Walker said, Now I will begin my war. I need a pony, the
Poncas have them.

He crawled upon his hands and knees to where the herd grazed. There had
been no watch set, for all the tribes were at peace, except the tribe
that walked alone.

And Rain Walker rode away into the night. He had big thoughts as he
rode.

The hunting was poor that year; it happened so, they say. Still toward
the place where the evening goes went the tribe, peering into far
places for the bison; and ever there was one who crept near the tepees
at night and heard the words of the Poncas, which are the same as the
Omahas speak.

And they wandered, hunting, in the places where the sandhills arethe
dreary places.

And one day it happened, they say, that a coyote and a hawk and some
crows saw two men in a very lonesome place among the sand hills. They
alone saw. And the two met, riding. One was a Ponca gone forth to seek
the unappearing herd. He was tall and well made, and his pony was
spotted. The other was also even as the first, although not a Ponca;
but his pony was not spotted.

And when they met a great cry went up from the one whose pony was not
spotted. The coyote and the hawk and the crows heard and saw. It seemed
a strange cry in the silence that lived there. Then he who rode the
spotted pony turned and fled; but an arrow is swifter than a pony,
though it be wind-footed; and he who fled fell upon the sand and the
pony ran at some distance and stopped. He looked on also.

And the two men met. He with the arrow in his back arose with a groan
from the sand and growled as the other approached and dismounted. They
seemed as two who had met and parted enemies.

They seized each other and rolled upon the sand. The coyote whined, the
crows cawed, but the hawk only watched. But all the while the ponies
neighed.

And the sting of the arrow weakened one, but he fought like a bear.
He made a good fight. But the other fixed his hands upon his enemys
throat until the silent places were filled with a gurgling and a
rasping of breath that came hard. Then there was only silence. The
coyote ran away, the crows and the hawk flew. The ponies alone watched
now.

And the man whose pony was not spotted arose and laughed very loudonly
it was not the laugh of a glad man. Then the man who laughed stripped
off the garments of the other and put them upon himself. Then he built
a fire and lit his pipe and made _choobay_ smoke. Then he spoke to the
various _wakundas_ that were somewhere there in the silence.

I have killed my enemy. I will burn his heart and give you the ashes,
O Grandfathers!

The crows heard this, for they had come back looking for their feast.

And the man burned the heart of his enemy and scattered the ashes,
singing a brave song all the while. He had learned to do this from the
Kansas; it is their custom.

Then the man got on the spotted pony and rode away, bearing with him
the weapons of the man who stayed. And when he was gone the crows and
the coyote came and made harsh noises at each other, for each was
hungry, and there was a feast spread there upon the sand.

       *       *       *       *       *

And it happened that evening, they say, that one rode into the Ponca
camp and went to the tepee where Sun Eyes, the Omaha woman, waited for
someone.

The man who came had his whole face hidden with a piece of buckskin,
having eye and mouth holes in it. And Sun Eyes was cooking over a fire
before her tepee.

Ho, Mad Buffalo! she said; you have not found the bison. Why have
you hidden your face?

I found no bison, said the man, but I saw something in the hills
which caused me to hide my face.

And Sun Eyes looked keenly at the man, for she thought it was some
_wakunda_ he had seen.

Why do you speak in a strange voice? said she; and she trembled as
she said it.

He who has seen something is never the same again! said he.

And while the woman wondered the two ate together. And as the man ate
he laughed very pleasantly at times like a man who is very glad.

Why do you laugh, Mad Buffalo? said the woman.

Because I was very hungry for something, and I have it now, said the
man.

And when he had ceased eating he sang glad songs, and again the woman
questioned.

I sing because of what I saw in the hills, said he.

And this seemed very strange to the woman. But it is not allowed that
one should question a man who has seen a _wakunda_.

And it happened that the man was pleased to speak evil words of Rain
Walker, and Sun Eyes hung her head; her eyes were wet.

Then said the man, having seen: Why do you act so? Do you want him?
Behold! Am I not as good to see as Rain Walker?

And he acted as one who is almost angry and a little sad. But the woman
only sobbed a very little sob, for as the chief said in the council, a
very wise man does not know the ways of a woman.

And it happened that night, they say, that, as the two slept, Sun Eyes
dreamed a strange dream that made her cry out. And the two sat up
startled.

What is it? said the man.

A dream! sobbed Sun Eyes.

What dream? said the man, and his voice seemed kind.

I cannot tell; I do not wish to be beaten.

Tell it, Sun Eyes. Was it aboutRain Walker?

She did not answer; the man sighed.

Do not be afraid, he said. And she spoke.

I dreamed that I saw my _zhinga zhinga_ that I am carrying. And it
was Rain Walkers. It had his face, and it looked upon me with hate.
It pushed me away when I offered my breast. It would take no milk from
me. And it seemed that its look pierced me like a barbed arrow. Thus I
awoke, and cried out.

The woman was sobbing, and a tremor ran through the man. She felt it as
he leaned against her, and she thought it anger.

Take me there where I came fromto the village of my people! she
cried. You are big and good to see, and many women will follow you!
Take me to my people! Dreams are wiser than men; the _wakundas_ send
them. I wish to go back, that my child may smile and take my breast.

And the man rose and began dressing for the trail.

I will take you back, said he. Dreams are wiser than men.

And before the day walked the two went forth on the long trail, back to
the village of the womans people.

The man went before and the woman followed, bearing the burdens of the
trail. But when the dawn came the man did a strange thing. He took the
burdens upon his own shoulders, saying nothing. It seemed his heart had
been softened; but his face being hidden, the woman could not see what
was written there.

And the trail was long; but the man was kind. He seemed no longer the
Mad Buffalo. He made fires and pitched the tepee like a squaw. He spoke
soft words.

And after many days of travelling the two came, as the Night was
beginning to walk, to the brown brow of the hill beneath which lay the
village of the Omahas.

And the man said: There are your people. Go!

And the woman moaned, saying: He will not take me, and the dream will
be true. Never on the long trail did my heart fail; but now I am weak.
My breast aches.

But the man said: Sun Eyes, had not Rain Walker ever a soft heart? He
will take you back. Look!

And the woman, who had been gazing through tears upon the village of
her people, turned and saw that the man had torn the buckskin from his
face. She gave a cry and shrank from what she saw.

But the man took her gently by the hand.

He will take you back, he said; dreams are wiser than men!




XV

THE SMILE OF GOD


THE Omahas were hunting bison. The young moon had been thin and bent
like a bow by the arm of a strong man when they had left their village
in the valley of Ne Shuga. Night after night it had grown above their
cheerless tepees, ever further eastward, until now it came forth no
more, but lingered in its black lodge like a brave who has walked far
and keeps his blankets because the way was hard and long.

All through the time of the growing and dying moon, the Omahas had
sought for the bison. Upon a hundred summits they had halted to gaze
beneath the arched hand into the lonely valleys from whence came no
sound of lowing cows or bellowing bulls. Like the voice of Famine
through the lonesome air came the _caw-caw_ of the crow. Like heaps of
bleaching bones the far-off sage brush whitened.

This evening as the women busied themselves with the building of the
tepees, there was no crooning on their lips. The valley in which they
were placing their camp was still but for the clattering of the poles,
as they were placed in their conical positions, or the flap of the
blankets, which were being bound about the poles for a covering.

At dreary intervals a grazing pony would toss its weary head and neigh
nervously, as if wondering at the stillness of its masters.

The silent squaws gathered armfuls of scrub oak and plum twigs, and lit
fires that lapped the blackening air with ruddy tongues and sent their
voices roaring up the hills, to be answered by their echoes that came
back faintly like the lowing of a phantom herd!

The old men and the braves sat about the fires and no word was on their
lips. From lip to lip the fragrant pipe passed, yet even its softening
influence could not move to speech the lips it touched. Each face upon
which the firelight fell was hideous with the gauntness of hunger.

One by one the runners, sent out in search of the herds, came into
camp. With a slow, swinging trot these great lean men approached, as
the gaunt wolf approaches his lair in the cold light of the morning
when no prey has been abroad all night. Sullen and silent they took
their places in the cheerless circles about the fires. There was no
need for words from them. Their expectant kinsmen looked into their
faces and read the tale of their despair so readily from the drawn skin
and sunken eyes that they groaned.

The glow of the west fell into the greyness of ashes, as a camp fire
falls when all the women sleep. Then the dark came over the eastern
hills. Far into the night the braves and old men sat about the fires,
speechless. As they listened, they could hear the hungry children
whining in their sleep. Once a squaw, suddenly awakened from a dream
near the fires, leaped to her feet and cried _Tae!_ _Tae!_ [bison]
The hoarse cry beat against the black hills and came back like a
mockery. The men gazed at each other and grinned with twitching lips.

Again the lonesome air slumbered, save for a weird song that arose
from the tepee of the big medicine-man, Ashunhunga. He was calling to
Wakunda. The song droned itself into silence like the song of a locust
when the evening is quiet.

After some time, a sound of wailing came from the mysterious tepee; and
as the men turned their faces to the place, they beheld the half-naked
form of the medicine-man passing like a spectre amid the glow of the
fires.

The dry skin clung to his ribs and sinews. His head was thrown back and
the fires lit his face. Through his parted lips the white teeth shone.
Out of the hollows of his eyes a wild light glared. The dream was upon
him! With bony hands clenched, he beat his naked breast and cried:
_Wah-hoo-ha-a!_ _Wah-hoo-ha-a-a-a!_ The curse of Wakunda is upon us!
The black spirits of the dead are about us! For Ashunhunga had a dream.
A black spirit came to him and its eyes were lightning and its voice
was thunder as it said: Why do you shelter him whom Wakunda hates?
_Wa-hoo-ha-a-a-a!_

Blood fell from the mysterious mans palms where the nails clenched
convulsively, and his arms and breast were smeared with blood. The
listeners shuddered as the wild voice began anew.

Ashunhunga will talk to the black spirit! He will learn whom Wakunda
hates! Him we shall cast from us! Then Wakunda will smile and the
valleys shall thunder with herds!

Beating his breast and gesticulating wildly with his long, bony arms,
the old man passed back amid the tepees.

Those who sat about the fires were frozen by the wild words into bronze
statues of Fear. Scarcely was a breath drawn; not a man moved. The
black spirits of the dead were about them! Not a hand was raised to
replenish the fires with faggots. The flames sank, and the embers sent
a dull blue light upon the circles of haggard faces!

As Ashunhunga passed on toward his tepee, he suddenly stumbled over
a shivering form, huddled in the shadow. Quickly regaining his feet,
he saw that upon which he had stumbled. It was a dwarfed, ill-shapen
body, with short, crooked legs and long emaciated arms with protruding
joints. The form raised itself upon its hands and knees and looked upon
the medicine-man with an idiot leer upon its face.

It was Shanugahi (Nettle) the cripple.

With a cry as of a squaw who sees a black spirit in her sleep,
Ashunhunga rushed into his tepee. His mystical songs wailed over the
camp for a while, then ceased. Overcome by his fanatical emotions, he
had fallen into a swoon. And he had a dream.

He was alone upon the prairie and hunger was pinching his entrails.
Then there came a bison bull toward him, roaring through the silence.
He raised his bow, and with sure aim, sent an arrow singing into the
heart of the beast. Then the air grew black, save for a blue light as
of dying fires. The bison began to change form! Its hind legs grew
short and crooked; its fore legs became long and lean and sinewy
like the arms of a starving man. Its body dwindled, dwindledand it
was human! Its head became indistinct and wavered as in a haze. Then
it grew boldly up in the ghastly light and the face was the face of
Shanugahi with the idiot leer!

The vision whirled giddily and sank into the dizzy darkness.

With a cry as of one stabbed in his sleep, Ashunhunga sprang from
his blanket and rushed out of his tepee. Those who sat about the
smouldering fires, startled from their dumb terror by the cry, raised
their eyes and gazed upon the face of the medicine-man as he passed.
They did not speak, but the question on their faces was who?

It is Shanugahi! said Ashunhunga in an awing whisper. It is
Shanugahi whom Wakunda hates! He has brought the curse upon us!

The ill-shapen bronze mass of flesh that was Shanugahi lay curled up
in sleep in the shadow of a tepee. Suddenly his sleep was broken by a
heavy hand reaching out of the darkness. He shook himself, raised his
head and gazed about. He saw the faces of a number of braves indistinct
in the dim glow of the fires. Nearby a pony stood ready for a rider.
Then a strange voice close to his ear, whispered hoarsely: Fly! Fly!
The black spirits of the dead are about you! The curse of Wakunda is
upon you! Fly! Fly!

Shanugahi stared about him, then turned his meaningless eyes upon his
tribesmen and leered. Strong arms seized him and placed him astride the
waiting pony. Someone lashed the animal across the haunches, and it
plunged down the valley into the blackness of the night.

When the dazed rider had gone some distance, the meaning of the
whispered words came upon him. Cold sweat sprang out on his limbs. He
glanced about him, and the night was swarming with demons!

His shriek cut the stillness like a knife of ice! He grasped the mane
of the pony with a convulsive clasp. He dashed his heels into the
flanks of the terrified brute! The lone gulches thundered with the beat
of hoofs. Bushes flew past, and each was a pursuing black spirit!

Shanugahi clung closely to the ponys back, hiding his face in its
tossing mane, clasping its neck with the strength of madness, pressing
its ribs with his knees until the straining animal groaned with pain
and fright. Through valleys, over hills, down gulches they fled!
Clumps of sage brush flitted past, and each was a heap of whitened
bones!

It was like falling in a nightmare through an immeasurable black pit,
save for the scamper of the coyote as it sought the gulches, whining,
or the tumbling flight of the owl or bat, fleeing with wings that
whirred in the stillness!

The pace of the pony became slower and slower. Its breath came in
short, rasping gasps. Then with a last effort of its terrified limbs,
it took the long incline of a high hill, and upon the bare summit
tumbled to its knees. Shanugahi rolled off its back, and horse and
rider, worn out, swooned upon the summit.

When Shanugahi awoke, the pale light that foregoes the coming sun lay
upon the shivering hills. He looked about him and saw a circle of grey
wolves staring at him with eyes like small moons dawnstricken. He felt
about him for a weapon, but found only his stone pipe and a pouch of
red willow bark.

He filled his pipe and striking a spark from a bit of flint that
strewed the summit, he lit it. Then the sun peeped over the far sky
line and with its horizontal rays touched the hills with fire. Its
light warmed the frozen nerves of Shanugahi. He puffed grey rings of
smoke into the air.

At length, taking his pipe from his mouth, he reared his hideous body
in the glow of the morning, and with a long, bony arm, raised his pipe
to the smiling sun in silent invocation. For some time, motionless,
he stood like a being of the black depths praying for mercy from the
shining heights. Then he uttered two words.

_Wakunda! Tae!_ (O God! Bison!)

The staring wolves, moved by the wild voice, raised their noses to the
heavens with a howl, and slunk away into the gulches. The sun rose
higher and higher, and Shanugahi breathed into his veins the laughing
gold of the morning. With all the simplicity of his nature, he forgot
the terror of the night. It was to him as some vague dream, dreamed
many summers past. Yet the one fixed idea of finding the bison swayed
his whole being.

His hunger had reached that stage in which it acts like a heavy draught
of some subtle intoxicant. The stupor of days past had been changed
into a joyous and even hopeful delirium. And as he looked upon the sun,
to him it was the smile of Wakunda! Now he would find the bison.

He caught his pony, grazing near by, and leaping upon its back, urged
its stiffened limbs into a jog and took the lonesome stretch of prairie
with song upon his lips. All day the pony jogged across the prairie
at an easy pace toward the west. At that time of the evening when the
coolness comes with the dew, and the bugs awake with drowsy hummings
among the grasses, Shanugahi caught a roaring sound as of some sullen
storm that thunders beneath the horizon.

He checked his pony and placing his hands to his ears, listened
intently. He knew the sound! Dismounting, he crawled to the top of a
hill and gazed into a broad valley.

As far as he could see, straining his eyes, the valley was black with
bison! For a moment he stood spellbound; then a great joy lashed his
blood into a frenzy. He rushed to his pony and mounting, turned its
head to the east. The night came down, and still Shanugahi held his
pony to a fast gallop. His brain whirled giddily. Now he had found the
bison! His people would not starve. He sang and shouted and laughed
until his voice broke into a cackle! The delirium of the rider was
caught by the pony. With all the might of long generations of prairie
herds, it sent the thundering hills and valleys under its feet.

At that time of the morning when the east grows pale, and sleep is
the deepest, the famished tribe, having moved a weary days journey
westward, was sleeping heavily. Suddenly a hoarse shout shattered their
dreams and made the hills clamorous with echoes!

The whole camp leaped from its blankets and stared with blinking eyes
in the direction of the shout.

There, upon the brow of a hill that overlooked the camp, stood a horse
and rider set in bold relief against the pale sky of morning. With a
long, bony arm the rider pointed to the westward and again he cried in
a weak, broken voice:

_Tae! Tae!_ (Bison! bison!)

Then horse and rider collapsed like the figures of a dream that wavers
with the morning. A number of men rushing up the hill, found the bodies
of the pony and Shanugahi. Upon the lips of the dead rider lingered a
calm smile as of contentment.

It is the smile of Wakunda, said one old man in awe.

Wakunda smiles! Wakunda smiles! shouted the men. The whole camp
caught up the cry. Bison! Bison! Wakunda smiles!

And when the sun arose, they were moving westward on the trail of
Shanugahi.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two nights afterward there was joy in the camp of the Omahas. Having
found the long-sought-for herd, they had feasted heavily, and now
they slept as the wolf sleeps when the prey has not escaped. Beside a
fire two old men were still awake, and as they smoked, they talked of
Shanugahi. He had found the herd. Wakunda had smiled upon him; and yet
Shanugahi was ugly and a cripple!

Ugh! they both grunted after a thoughtful silence, shaking their
heads in wonderment at so incomprehensible a thing.

Then they wrapped themselves in their blankets, and slept.




XVI

THE HEART OF A WOMAN


THE council of the fathers sat in the Big Lodge with very grave faces,
for they had come together to pass judgment upon the deed of a woman.
As they passed the pipe about the circle, there were no words; for in
the silence the good spirits may speak, and well they knew that it is a
big thing to sit in judgment.

And after a time of silence and deep thought, the door-flap of the
lodge was pushed aside by two who camean old man bent with many loads,
and a woman in whose eyes the spring still lived. And when the two had
sat down without the circle, the head chief spoke: Let the man speak
first. Then the old man, who had brought the woman, arose.

Fathers, you see a man with a sad heart, for I have brought my
daughter before you for judgment. The things which she has told me I
could have buried very deep in my breast; but I am old, and the wisdom
of the old is mine. Who can bury a bad thing deeper than the spirits
see?

And so I am here to make sharp words against myself, for the father
and the child are one.

You remember that the season of singing frogs [April] has passed
three times since one of the palefaces came among us. He was a
paleface, but he was not like his brothers who find gladness in doing
deeds that are bad. You have not forgotten how his words and deeds were
kind, his voice very good to hear, nor how his face had the beauty of a
womans, though it was not a womans face. Also his hands were white as
the first snow fallen on a green place; and his hair was long like the
hair of our people, but it clung about his head like a brown cloud when
the evening is old.

He was hungry and lean when he came among us. His pony was hungry and
lean. And we took him in with glad hearts; we lit the feast fires for
him; his pony we staked in our greenest places: for he was not like his
brothers.

And we called him the man with the singing box, for he brought with
him a thing of wood and sinews; and over this, while we feasted, he
drew a stick of wood with the hair of a ponys tail fastened to it,
making songs sweeter than those of our best women singers, and deeper
than the voices of men who are glad.

Much we wondered at this, for the magic of the paleface is a great
magic. And as he made the wood and sinews sing together, we forgot to
eat and the feast fires fell blue; for never before had such a singing
been heard in our lands. And once he made it sing a battle song that
snarled like a wounded rattlesnake in a dry place, and cried like an
angry warrior, and shrieked like arrows, and thundered like many pony
hoofs, and wailed like the women when the band comes back with dead
braves across the backs of ponies. And as he made it sing this song,
even we who were wise leaped to our feet and drew forth our weapons
and shouted the war cry of our peopleso great was the song. And when
our shouting ceased, the man made the medicine box sing low and sweet
and thin like a woman crying over a sick _zhinga zhinga_ [baby] in the
night. And we forgot the battle cries; we gave tears like old women.

Do you remember? This is the man of whom I speak.

Many young moons grew old and passed away, and still he lived among
us, until, lo! he was even as our kinsman, for he learned the tongue of
our people, being great of wit.

And he told us of a wanderer whose own people were unkind to him; a
tale of one who was not of the people of whom he was born, because he
loved the spirits that sing, more than a very rich man loves his herds
of ponies blackening many hills where they graze. And it was of himself
he told; he was the wanderer. So we loved him because of this and
because of his kind words and because of the song which he made in his
medicine box.

And all the while my girl here was growing tallervery good to see.
Many times I said to my woman, There is something growing between
these two. And we both saw it with glad hearts, for he was a great
man.

And one night in my first sleep I was awakened by a crying of sorrows
better to hear than laughtera moan that grew loud and fell again into
softness like a night wind wailing in a lonesome place where thickets
grow. And my woman beside me whispered, It is the spirits singing.
But the girl here only breathed very hard. I could hear her breathing
in the darkness.

And I got up; I pushed the skin flap aside; I stood as though I were
in a dream. For there by the tepee stood the man with the singing box
at his neck. His long, white fingers worked upon the sinews; his arm
drew the hair-stick up and down. His face looked to the sky and the
white fires of the night were upon it. Never had I seen such a face;
for it was not a mans face nor yet a womans. It was the face of a
good mans spirit come back from the star-paths. I looked at his lips,
for it seemed that the singing grew up from his mouth; but his lips
were very still.

And my eyes made tears; for many forgotten sorrows came back to me at
once, and I felt a great kindness for all things, which I could not
understand.

And when he dropped his arm and looked at me, his eyes threw soft,
white fire into my breast, and then I knew the singing was not for me.
Once when my woman was young and still in the lodge of her father, I
looked upon her with such a look.

So I gave the girl to the paleface; and for a time the singing box was
still; for they made a silent music between them. And before the first
frosts made the hills shiver, the palefaces who trade for furs came to
our village, and the man went with them; and with him went the woman.
No man can be deaf to the call of his kind; so he went. And now the
woman shall speak, and you shall judge her deed.

The old man sat down and rested his face in his hands. The young woman
arose to her feet. With lips parted the chiefs bent forward to catch
the words which should fall from her mouth. Tall and thin she was,
and shapely. But the shadows of a great toil and a great sorrow clung
about her lean cheeks and under her black eyes, grown too big with much
weeping.

Fathers, she began, I will tell you how my bad deed grew upon me;
and you shall judge. I will take the punishment, for I have felt much
aching of the breast and I can stand yet a little more.

Three summers ago I followed the man of the singing box into the
North. This you knowbut the rest you do not know. It is the way of
the paleface to toil for the white metal. They showed my man the white
metal, and it led him into the North among strange peoples, where there
is much gathering of furs. And I went with him, for a woman is weak and
must follow the man.

Far into the North we went where the Smoky Water runs thin so that a
very little man can throw a stone across it. And the singing box went
with us.

And we built a lodge of logs, after the manner of his people, near to
a great log lodge where the big pale chief lived and said words that
should be obeyed. And for a time our hearts sang together. But when the
snows had come, it happened that the big pale chief spoke a word, and
my man went with his brothers, driving many dogs further into the North
where there are furs of much worth.

And when my man left he said, Take good care of Vylin while I am
gone, for she is dearer to me than my life. And I stared at him
because I did not understand. It was the singing box of which he spoke;
as though it were a person he spoke of it; he called it Vylin; and much
I wondered.

But because my heart was warm toward the man, I did acts of kindness
to the singing box, which he called Vylin; for I had not yet learned
that it was no box of wood, but the spirit of a dead woman of the
palefaces.

Through the long cold nights I held it close to me under the blankets.
And often in the night I was awakened by its crying when in my sleep
I touched it strongly. Like a _zhinga zhinga_ [baby] it cried; and my
heart was softened toward it, for I had no child then. Through the days
I talked to Vylin. I washed it much that it might be clean and of a
good smell. And often it made soft sounds like a _zhinga zhinga_ that
is glad. Then would I hold it to my dry breasts and sing to it.

But more and more I learned that it was no box of wood, but a living
thing. For I began to see that it had the shape of a woman. Its neck
was very slender; its head was small; and its hair fell in four little
braids across its neck and breast down to its hips. And the more I
learned, the more my breast ached; for he loved Vylin, and her voice
was sweeter for singing than my voice. And I thought much of how she
sang for him alone. And I said, She does not sing for meonly for him
does she sing; therefore she loves him well.

When the grass came again and the ice broke up, my man came back with
the furs and the dogs and the men. They came floating down the river
on big canoes. And I sang when he came again into his lodge, for the
winter had been long. Also, I showed him how kind I had been to Vylin;
I thought he would be very glad. But he frowned and spoke sharp words.
He said it was wrong to wash Vylin. My breast ached; I could not
understand. Does not a good mother wash her _zhinga zhinga_, that it
may be clean and of a good smell? I had no _zhinga zhinga_ then, and so
I had been a mother to Vylin.

And when I told him this, he laughed a very harsh laugh, and said it
was Vylin, not a _zhinga zhinga_; so that I was sad until he spoke a
very soft word, then I forgot for many days.

But as the grass grew taller and the scent of green things blew in
every wind, my man grew strange toward me. Like a man with the ache for
home he was. And more and more it became his mood to be very silent
while he made Vylin sing to himO such strange, soft songs, like
spirits weeping!

And more and more my heart grew sore toward Vylin, for when I sang
that he might forget her to look upon me, he frowned and spoke sharp
words.

So one day as he sat in a shady place, making songs with his fingers,
I said to him: If so softly you should lay your fingers upon _my_
neck, I too could sing as sweetly! And he smiled, and it was like the
sun breaking through a cloud that has hung long over the day. And he
drew me close to him and said: Do you see the leaves upon this tree,
and do you know how many? And I laughed, for I was glad, and in the
old days it had often been his wish to joke so. But he said: So many
of the palefaces have listened to me making Vylin sing; and they wept
to hear. But now am I far away and strange peoples are about me.

And that was the last of my gladness for many moons; for more and more
he wished to be silent. And when the snows came again he went away.
And I was very lonesome and sad until I knew that I would be a mother.
Then my heart sang, for I said: Now, my man will look upon me again
and speak soft words as in the old times. Does Vylin bring him _zhinga
zhingas?_

And all through the cold days I was glad; my heart was soft. I took
good care of Vylin; I was kind to her, for at last I thought that she
would be second in his heart. I pitied her as I thought this. I washed
her no more, but ever through the frosty nights I kept her warm with
many blankets, even though I shivered.

And when the grass came my man came also. And another came, a _nu
zhinga_ [boy]. But my man looked with cold eyes upon my _zhinga
zhinga_; so I wept many nights, many, many nights. And much weeping
made me not good to see. So the man looked upon me no more; only upon
Vylin did he look. With very soft eyes did he look upon her; with such
eyes did he look upon me in the old days.

My heart grew very bitter. Often I heard him talking soft talk to
hersuch as he talked to me in the old times. And I wished to tear her
hair, her yellow hair from her head! I wished to kill her, to walk upon
her, to hear her groan, to see her die!

The womans eyes flashed a battle light. Her hands were clenched, her
face was sharp and cruel. Very tall she grew in her angera mother of
fighting men.

And that night, she said, I threw angry words at the man. I spoke
bad things of Vylin. I called great curses down upon her. And I said:
She sings, but does she bring you sons to feed you when you are old?
And he laughed with a harsh sound.

So that night when the man slept I got up very stealthily from the
blankets. My breast ached, and many black spirits pressed their fingers
into my heart. I took a knifea very sharp knife. I uncovered Vylin
where she lay sleeping in her blankets. I felt for the place where her
heart should be. Then I struck, struck, struck! Very deep I sent the
sharp knife, and I laughed to hear the great groan that Vylin made as
she died.

And also the man heard. He leaped from his blankets. He struck me with
his fist; he beat me. He called down all the big curses of his people
upon me. He gave me the _nu zhinga_. He pushed me from the door into
the darkness.

Begone! he said, for you have killed Vylin!

And I went into the darkness with my _nu zhinga_. Many days have I
walked with much hunger; and always the _nu zhinga_ was a heavy burden.
And now I am thin; my feet are weary; my breast aches.

       *       *       *       *       *

A deep sighing shook the young woman as she sat down. The old man
arose, and there was a sound of heavy breathing as he spoke to the
chiefs who sat to judge: My girl has spoken of her bad deed. She has
killed the singing spirit that the paleface loved. How shall she be
punished?

And after a long stillness the head chief spoke: The heart of a woman
is a strange thing, a tender thing; who shall judge it?

And one by one they who sat to judge arose and left the big lodge.




XVII

MIGNON


BUT, Yellow Fox, I protested, no one understands them; they do not
understand themselves!

Yellow Fox grunted and smiled, showing a very white set of wolfish
teeth. We two were sitting together outside the lodge, and, male-like,
we had hit upon the topic of woman. The locust-like cadences of the
songs and the shuffle of dancing feet came muffled to us. The scent of
boiling beef and the good smoke-tang of wood fires permeated the sultry
night air, lifting my not overcivilised fancy back into the spacious
star-hung feast rooms of the dead years, where big-boned, brawny,
fighting men indulged their lusts for steaming haunches. The full moon
lifted a Rabelaisian face of lusty red above the hills, and I saw by
its light the eager spirit of the story-teller bright in the eyes of
Yellow Fox.

What they understand I do not know, he began; I only know I do not
understand. And I have travelled far. When I was a young man, many
strange valleys knew my feet, and from many hilltops my eyes looked
forth. For from my first moccasins my feet caught the itch for going.
And in many villages of strange peoples I have lived for little
spaces, until the feasts were tasteless and the maidens ugly. Then did
my moccasins itch my feet again, so that I went forth and sought new
feasts, other maidens.

And I have known many maidens. None of them did I understand; and
least of allMignon.

Even to-night something of the soft summer smell of her is in my nose;
and if I were not old I would walk far, walk far; for that smell is
like a voice calling over big waters and many valleysa voice so far
away that the ear does not catch itso thin that it is no sound, but a
feeling.

Have I told you how that a white man came to our lands once and led
me on a long, strange trail? It happened so. He was a keeper of many
strange men and many horses and many strange animals, and for money he
showed these to many peoples, and so grew rich.

And the man showed me much money; he told me of new lands and new
peoples; he spoke of feasts, of women that were as dreams. Therefore,
I felt the itch in my feet again, and I went with the man. And we came
at last to many big tepees, where the man kept the strange things that
he showed to the people for money. One of his tepees was as big as the
village of a tribeand he had many.

I had my place among all these strange things; for the white man said:
You are the wild man that growls like a bear and eats babies. I give
you money and you must look very wild and growl much when the boys
stick at you with straws. And this was good fun.

So I stood twice every day fastened to a post by a thong of metal.
The people stood about me and stared. I growled, I pulled at the
fastenings, I ate raw meat; I was very wild. Many came to see, and when
I would have gone back to the lands of my people, the white man showed
me more money, so that I stayed.

We travelled very far with the big tepees. We came to the Big Salty
Water, but we did not stop there; we crossed itand were in another
land.

And then there was a big villagea very big village. There we stopped,
and the people came to see.

You know that villgeParsPars? asked Yellow Fox, falling
momentarily into English.

Yes, Paris, I corrected, and you were with Barnum.

Ah, he assented, speaking his own tongue again; and it is a village
of women that make the eyes glad and the blood quick! I stood many
days, growling for the people and eating raw meat. And one day Mignon
came. A young man of her own people was with her. They stared and
talked much together. Some of their talk I knew, for it was the talk
that the fur traders used, and my fathers father was a trader for furs.

And Mignon made the eyes glad. She was tall for a woman and not thick.
The women of my people are short and thick. Her face was very white,
and her eyes were big and deeplike waters in a shadow.

And the man made jokes at me that stung like elkhorn whips, for he was
thin and looked as one whose blood is half water. I could have choked
him with two fingers like a worm. _So!_

Yellow Fox snapped his fingers viciously.

And it pleased the young man to shove his finger into my ribs and
laugh. So I grasped his arm very hard. I put his finger to my mouth; I
bit it and the blood came. He cried _ow ow_; then I said to the woman,
using what speech of hers I knew: Take this baby man of yours away or
I will eat him, for I am hungry. But you are good to see; I like you;
touch me.

And she, wondering that I spoke her speech, touched me!

Aheverything was changed!

Yellow Fox suddenly passed into a subconscious mood. The moon, grown
pale with its ascent, illumined his masterful male features, over which
I could see the dream of old days flitting like a ghost. The song of
the women dancing about the feast fires within arose into a high and
tenuous minor of yearning, filling up the momentary gap in the story
like a chorus. In the wake of the passing gust of song, the voice of
Yellow Fox arose, soft, low, musicalthe voice of memory.

Her hands she laid upon mesoft and white and thin, they were. She
passed them over the muscles of my breast; she stroked my arms. Soft
as a mothers touch was hers; like a mothers touchbut I felt a fire
burning at her finger tips, that made me wish to fight big men for her,
and make them bleed and make them groan and make them die, slobbering
blood in the dust! Then afterward to take her far away, thrown across
my back like a dead fawn; to build a lodge for her in a lonesome place
where mans face never was!

Much hair she hadmuch hair that hung above her face like a dark
cloud upon a white sky at evening. And it brushed across my breast! I
shivered as in a wind that drives the snow before itand yet I was not
cold.

And then she was goneswallowed up in the river of people. But not all
of her was gone. A smell sweeter than the earth-smell when the spring
rains fall was in my nostrils! A smell that gnawed within me like a
hungeryet I did not wish to eat! A smell of soft, white fleshoh, very
soft and white! And now in my old age I call that smell Mignon.

And the people, like a noisy, muddy stream, flowed round me, past me.
But I growled no more; for I did not wish for fun. I hated themthey
stank! An ache like the ache for home was upon me; an ache like the
ache of a man who smells the home-smoke in a dream and wakes far off
from home.

Two sunlights passedand in the evening I stood under many lights,
bound with the iron thongs; and the noisy, stinking stream of people
was about me. Their staring eyes were as many bugs that swarmed about
and stung me. I strained at the iron thongs; I hurled the black curses
of my people in among themand they were pleased. But this was no play;
I wished to rush among them and walk upon them; for I had seen, and now
no longer did I see.

But suddenly the smell came back! It grew up like the smell of spring
when the ice makes thunder in the rivers and the flowers come out! And
she was there beside me.

I forgot the people; I was no longer angry. I was in a big lonesome
prairie with the sunlight and the singing winds, and she was with me,
and all the air seemed soft and cool as when a black-winged raincloud
shuts out a day of heat.

I can feel her hands upon me yet.

       *       *       *       *       *

Yellow Fox sighed. A passionate outburst of song from the dancers
within filled the quiet night with sounds of longing, through which the
cowhide drums throbbed feverishly, like a heart.

And the words she spoke were soft. They made me wish to shout the
mating songs of my people. They made me very strong. And then I learned
her nameMignon.

Mignon! Mignon! Such a sound the spring winds make among the first
leaves; and yetit is not all a sound; it is part a smell!

And after that she came often; every evening she came, like a south
wind blowing over prairies sweet with rain at sunset. Many things she
asked me and I told her many things. I made with my mouth a picture of
my own lands; and some of it she put in a little book, and some she
only drank with all her face, as though she was thirsty.

And they who had travelled far with us, the pitchers of the tepees and
the tenders of the animals, laughed softly in passing, showing their
teeth in mirthfor were they not jealous?

One night she did not come. And it happened on that night that the big
tepees were folded up for another trail; and in the morning we were far
away. My breast cried out for her; my nose longed for the smell which
was Mignon.

So I spoke of her to the pitchers of the tepees, and they laughed very
loud and long, sending forth breaths that stank as they laughed. They
said bad things of Mignon. They said, Can you not understand? She is
of those that her people have cast out. And this made my breast cry
out for her again; for was I not also alone? Were not my own people
far away? But the rest of it I knew to be another white mans lie! One
liar I struck very hard in the teeth; and when he got up from the dust,
slobbering blood and toddling like a baby, he laughed no more and said
no more bad things of Mignon. And was this not proof that he had lied?

Is the first earth-smell of the spring bad? Had not many maidens of
the prairies longed for me; and were they not good? Was I not big and
of heavy muscles? Was I not young and good for the eyes of women?

Since I am old and much withered, I can say this; for I have become
another man.

       *       *       *       *       *

The song of the women-singers within had ceased, but the sullen drums
kept up a throbbing snarl. At length the voice of Yellow Fox continued
in a low monotone:

We stopped in many big villages; and my breast was sick. More and more
I wished for the prairies. At night I heard the dry winds singing in
the grasses. I spoke no more of Mignon, for I was afraid to hear again
the laughter of the pitchers of the tepees. One more laugh would have
made my eyes blind with blood, and I would have killed.

I lost the wish to eat; I grew shadow-thin. So the owner of the tepees
said: This wild man is dying for a sight of his prairies; I will send
him back.

I travelled far, and again I was in my own land. I saw the hills; I
smelled the smoke of the fires of my people. But this no longer filled
me. I had seen, and now no longer could I see.

And the winter came. I sat alone much, and as I sat alone, I had big
thoughts. I said: This that I have seen was a dream thing. It is gone;
and I cannot find the sleep trail that leads to it again. Therefore,
I will do as others. I will take a woman of my own people. I will eat
again; for this dream has only made me thin.

So I made a young woman of my people glad. I took her into my lodge.
But even through the time of driving snows, I smelled the smell of
spring. Mignon! Mignon! I heard the rain winds singing in the first
leaves! Mignon! Mignon! I heard the sighing of summer waters! Mignon!
Mignon! It was half a sound and half a smelldream sound, dream
smellso thin, so thin!

And the time came when the big swift arrows of the geese flew
northward, spreading softness as of many camp fires in all the air;
and the River wakened and shook itself, shouting with a hoarse voice
into the south. The green things came, and there was a singing of frogs
where the early rains made pools. The smell, which was Mignon, breathed
up out of the earth; the sound, which was Mignon, lived in the trees
and grasses.

And then the time came when it is no longer the spring, and not yet
quite the summer. One evening I sat before my lodge, smoking and
thinking big thoughts. And the sun was low. A dust cloud grew far down
the road that twisted like a yellow snake toward the village of the
white men. It was a waggon coming. It grew bigger; a white man was
driving it. It came near; there was a woman in it. I stared very hard;
I rubbed my eyes, for what I saw was as though it had all grown up out
of my pipe smoke.

The woman was tall and not thick. Much hair she hadmuch hair that
hung above her face like a black cloud upon a white sky in the
evening. And in all the air about, there grew a smell sweeter than the
earth-smell when the spring rains fall. I sat very still; I did not
wish to frighten the dream away. And the woman came toward me with much
rustling of garments, like the speaking of green leaves in the wind or
the thin, small drumming of raindrops.

Then, between the puffing of two smoke rings, the Spring had grown
bigand was the Summer! It was Mignon! It was Mignon!

       *       *       *       *       *

Yellow Fox lifted his face to the full moon, and his voice was raised
to a poignant cry as he uttered the word that was half sound, half
smell. Then for some time he brooded with his chin resting in his
hands, while the women-singers within filled the heavy air with
wailings. At length he sat up and leisurely filled his pipe. His face
had become a wrinkled mask again. He smoked awhile, then passing the
pipe to me, he continued, and his voice was thick as though he still
breathed smoke:

After the snows have run away, the earth-smell rises and all things
grow drunk with it. The he-wolf sniffs it; he forgets his last years
mate; he takes another and forgets. The air and the earth and the water
are full of new loves, and nothing is ashamed.

It was so.

When the next sunlight came I made ready for the trail. I rolled up
my tepee. All the while my woman stared upon the woman who had come,
with eyes made sharp with hate. I called in my ponies from the grazing
places. I hitched a pony to the drag. I put upon the drag the tepee and
the food and the little box that Mignon had brought with hera box of
many garmentsgarments that made songs when she walked, like the songs
of rain in the leaves. I lifted Mignon upon the drag-ponys back, and
we rode away on the summer trail.

I heard my woman wailing and crying out bitterly in my lodge, but a
spirit led me onthe spirit that calls the green things out in the
springthe spirit that whispers into the ear of the sleeping River and
makes it leap up and shout and tear the thongs that bind itthe spirit
that makes the wolves cry out in the lonesome places that the mate may
hear. That spirit went calling down the trail I followed.

And we came to a place by the river where the hills were high and many
leaves made coolness. There I pitched the tepee; and the days were as
little flashes of light, and the nights were as little shadows passing.

Never before had I found it so good to live. Mignon made songs that
laughed and cried; and when she did not sing, the rustle of her
garments was a song. I became as a squaw; I brought the wood and water;
I made the fires; I cooked. I was bowed before her. Never before had I
bowed before anyone, for I was strong. I could not understand. She was
so soft and white and of so sweet a smell!

But the time came when she no longer sang. She grew silent, and each
day gazed long upon the river. Her hands touched me no more with the
touch of soft fires. So I grew kinder still. I spoke soft words. I made
sweet sounds to call her. But she frowned and pushed me away.

My breast ached much, so I said: You think always of that baby man
whose finger I bit. I could choke him with my fingers_so_! But she
laughed in my face, making sharp jokes to fling at me. I was stung as
with whips when the whippers are angry. I said: Go back to your baby
man!

I did not wish her to go; they were the words of my anger. But she got
up very straight and tall. There was lightning in her eyes. Thunder
slept in her face. And her hair seemed as a black cloud that blows up
angrily out of the hot south!

She went to the tepee; she made ready to go; and all the while I
watched with fires in my breast. Then suddenly she turned upon meher
face was a flame. She flung words at me: You are all the same! She
spit in my face! I have been struck in the teeth by strong men, but
never have I felt so hard a blow. I sat as a man in a dream. I heard
the angry song of her skirts as she fled up the back-trail. And then
I was as one who wakens with a great hunger, and smells raw meat! I
leaped up; I ran after her; I meant to kill her!

I caught her; I struck her with my fist, even as I struck the man who
lied. I put my fingers at her throat and pressed very hard. I carried
her back to the tepee. I thought I had killed her.

Oh, the smell of her flesh as she lay very stillas though I had
stepped upon a flower!

And then after a long time, when my breast was growing sick, she
opened her eyes and looked upon me. O tender, tender were her eyes and
full of soft fires! It was the old look, only it was stronger. She
raised herself to her knees; she put her arms around my neck; she put
her lips on my lips; she called me soft names!

I thought this was some womans trick. I pushed her from me. I said:
I am hungry; you are my squaw; cook my food! And she brought wood
and water; she made a fire; she worked for me. All the while her eyes
were soft, and often she touched me with finger tips that burned as of
old with soft fires. I could not understand. When I was kind, then was
she not kind. And now, with the blue marks of my angry fingers at her
throat, she worked for me, her eyes were soft for me, her finger-tips
were warm for me. I cannot understand.

Yellow Fox took the pipe from my hands and smoked long in silence. He
sighed deeply, breathing in great breaths of smoke. At length, growing
impatient, I ventured a question: And what became of Mignon?

He laid down his pipe and said in a low voice: The woman who wailed
in the lodge had not forgotten!

The plums ripened, he continued, and the flowers that bloomed upon
our summer trail were heavy with seed. The hills grew brown. A greyness
like smoke was in all the air. The grapes hung thick and purple.

And it happened one night when the first small pinch of frost was in
the air, that Mignon would sing soft baby songs, such as the mothers of
her people sang, she said. Oh, such soft, low songs! I hear them yet.
A kindness was in her face, like that in the face of a young mother. I
saw it by the light of the wood fire that held the frost away. And when
she had sung much, as to a child, she put her hands upon my shoulders
and she said a strange thing. This is what she said, I remember:
Sometime, Yellow Fox, I will sing to your _zhinga zhinga_ [baby]; will
you be glad?

And I wondered much, for her eyes were wet when she said it.

And that night she fell to sleep with her soft hands clutching my arm.
And something made me wish to sing. I watched her sleeping, and there
was an ache in my breast when I remembered the feel of my angry fingers
at her throat. And then I slept.

But in that time when the night is deepest and sleep is like a weight
upon the eyes, a sharp cry woke me. I leaped up. The fire was almost
dead. I heard feet flying through the dead leaves into the darkness.
One hand felt warm and wet; I raised it to my nose and it was blood.
And then I heard a gasping for breath and a sound of gurgling. I put my
hand upon the breast of Mignonand it was wet with blood!

I scraped the embers together and made a little flame. I looked upon
her face and it had the look of death. Eyes that ached she turned upon
me. I stopped the blood with torn garments. I called her soft names and
she clutched my fingers. Then she was very quiet. I could hear leaves
dropping out in the night.

And when the face of the night turned grey, she opened her eyes that
were hot and dry. With very weak hands she drew my ear close to her
lips. She breathed a little broken piece of songa baby songa song of
the mothers of her people. And when I looked upon her again, her face
was pinched, her eyes stared.

       *       *       *       *       *

Yellow Fox lapsed into another prolonged silence. The dancers and
singers in the lodge had ceased. A heavy, sultry silence filled the
night. When he spoke again his voice came low and muffled:

I buried her after the manner of my people. I sang the songs of the
dead. Above her grave I killed the pony that she rode. And then I
went away upon the trail that was no more the trail of summer. But
the winds in the grasses sang her name. Mignon! Mignon! I heard the
rain winds singing in the first leaves. Mignon! Mignon! I heard the
sighing of summer waters. Mignon! Mignon! I smelled the smell of
spring. Everywhere it wasMignon!half sound, half smelldream-sound,
dream-smellso thinso thin.




XVIII

A POLITICAL COUP AT LITTLE OMAHA


THE struggle for Congressional honours in the Third District of
Nebraska was to be a hard one. The white voters of the District were
about evenly divided between the two parties, and therefore the
necessary elective majority was to be found among the Omaha Indians,
whose reservation lies in this district.

So this remnant of the Dark Ages became of pivotal importance in
Twentieth Century politics; and it was here, in the wildest land of the
district, that the decisive battle of strategy must be fought.

For practical purposes, the intelligent white voter ceased to exist,
and there was only a slothful, ignorant band of semi-savages who should
choose by chance the national representative of educated thousands.

The typical reservation Indian is primarily a stomach, and secondarily
nothing in particular. Let him fill his belly and he is easily handled.
This axiom had been taken as a basis for action by the whiphands of
the Democratic Party, who, accordingly, scattered broadcast throughout
the reservation considerable quantities of the meat of superannuated
bulls; sat in the feasts with cross-legged condescension; smoked the
reeking stone pipes; drank hot soup with the suppressed shudders of a
revolting stomach, and called the brown men brothers.

This had all worked very well in the latter days of September, and
there had been considerable rejoicing in local Democratic circles over
the bright prospects for a sweeping majority.

It was not until the first of October that the opposition suddenly
hurled a thunderbolt out of the blue sky of its seemingly serene
inactivity. The Agent, holding his appointment under a Republican
administration, announced at a weekly land payment that $100,000 of the
considerable sum held in trust by the Government would be paid pro rata
to the Omahas during the month. It was after this announcement that the
local leaders of the Republican Party became active. They explained to
their brothers how surpassingly good it was of them to bring about this
payment. Would their brothers forget this at the November election? Of
course not!

So it happened that the bull meat lost its power of persuasion and for
several weeks there was not a brown Democrat on the reserve. Thus, at
the opening of the big payment on a Monday morning two weeks before
election, the Democratic candidate for Congress found himself staring
Defeat in the face (which was brown) after having enjoyed several weeks
of victory (which was premature).

The big payment has always been picturesque and is now fast becoming
impossible. It may be defined as the spectacular bow of the Present to
the Past, with which Civilisation lowers its proud plume and says to
the Savage Age: Sorry I swiped your land; take that and dont feel
sore! Or words to that effect.

The opening days of the big payment were warm with the lazy warmth of
the mellow, golden hours of late October. The untilled hills of the
reservation thrust themselves up into the autumn glare, unashamed of
their poverty of soil. The Agency building nestled forlornly in a creek
valley surrounded by the yellow, wrinkled hills.

In the early morning a lazy string of vehicles began to pour into
the Agency from the dozen or more roads that outraged the compass
with their crazy windings, and seamed the bronze face of the prairie
with ugly scars. Carts, buggies, waggons, carriages, some of glaring
newness, weighted down to the axles with squaws, papooses and the
inevitable mortgage; others in an epileptic stage of decay, with the
weary air of having borne the weight of outlawed paper for many moons;
ponies, long-haired, and emaciated with many unconsoling feeds of post
and halter, carrying at once upon their sawlike backs their sweating,
heavy masters, and (heavier than these) the seeming consciousness of
long-dishonoured promissory notes; these constituted the grotesque
Republican procession that streamed into Little Omaha, as the Agency
is called, on that morning in October.

It was as a tribal exodus. The entire tribe of twelve hundred odd men,
women, and children was leaving its shacks and tepees that morning, in
search of the minted eagles of the Government, just as, of old, they
moved in a hungry body upon the trail of the bison.

As the vanguard of this grand but dilapidated army of the primitive
world closed in upon the Agency, it was met by the vanguard of the
greater commercial army of civilisation, and a wordy skirmish ensued.
These were the inevitable collectors who hang about an Indian payment
like a crowd of crows scenting a carcass. One might have heard such a
conversation as this above the tumult of the meeting races:

Well, Big Bear, goin to pay that note to-day?

Ugh?

I say [voice raised a key], are you goin to pay that note_muska
zhinga, wabugazee_ [money, note]?

_Unkazhee!_ (Dont understand.)

Damn your black hide, Big Bear, you can talk as good as I can! I say,
[voice raised to a shriek] if you dont pay that note, Ill come over
to your place and take every dodgasted, straw-bellied _shonga_ [pony]
youve got!

Gad up!

And the delinquent debtor put the whip to his long-haired, shambling
mortgages and disappeared in a cloud of dust.

The Omaha is a genius for contracting debts. At the beginning of the
big payment, the aggregate debts of the tribe were roughly estimated at
$200,000, the living representative of long-digested groceries, starved
ponies, shattered vehicles and forgotten alcoholic debauches.

The Government, in the wisdom of blindness, had caused large placards
to be posted at the entrances to the Agency grounds, bearing this
order: No collector of any description shall be allowed within a
radius of half a mile from the pay station. Accordingly, the burly
Indian police strutted about in blue clothes and brass buttons
obstreperously hustling the white creditors over the half-mile line,
where they lounged in disconsolate groups along the dusty highway,
playing mumble-peg, pitching horseshoes, and verbally sending the
entire tribe to the devil.

Be cussed if I dont hate to see the Twentieth Century kicked
downstairs this way by the Dark Ages! Cussed if I dont! Thus a little
wiry, pale-faced undertaker was heard to exclaim. His name was Comfort
and he appeared to be a positive misery both to himself and to the
delinquent relatives of the many good Indians he had laid away.

Beside the little undertaker, there were lawyers, bankers clerks,
grocerymen, liverymen, middlemen, butchers, doctors, and a half
dozen politicians, there for the purpose of whipping the brown
voters into line. There were men like wolves, bears, dogs, goats,
roosters, beetles, scorpions. The little undertaker was the scorpion;
a middleman was like a bear; there was a bankers clerk like a goat;
and a thin, angular, tall politician, with a body appropriately like an
interrogation point, who slunk about like a hungry wolf.

By ten oclock the last stragglers of the tribe had arrived and the
Agency grounds were filled with circles of sweating, brown men, women,
and children, passing the stone pipe, tranquilly awaiting the coming of
the Agent, whose name, upon a reservation, is a shout.

By 10:30 the Agent appeared, riding down the dusty road from his
residence. He was preceded by mounted police of pompous bearing, who
shouted The Agent! Make way for the Agent! to the circles of their
tribesmen who sat in the dust of the highway.

A short while afterward the loungers at the half-mile line heard the
voice of a crier at the door of the pay station, calling the first name
on the roll in the golden autumnal silence.

_Nuzhee Mona! Geegoho!_ (Rain Walker! Come here!)

Then the fact that Mr. Rainwalker, a leader of the tribe much indebted
to the white man, was about to be paid, became volatile as ammonia, and
the fluttering of time-yellowed legal paper was heard along the waiting
line of creditors.

Owes me $6.46 with interest for four years!

Me $25 and interestoutlawed!

Ive got the old cusss note for fifty!

I buried his fourth and sixth wives, squeaked the little undertaker,
seven and nine years ago, respectively!

Such exclamations ran down the line like a volley in different
variations of vocal emphasis.

Wonder how hes votin, mused the hungry wolf of a politician.

To the devil with politics! roared the bear of a middleman; I want
the rent back I advanced him!

At that moment Mr. Rainwalker was seen to leave the station, mount
his pony, and proceed down the dusty road toward the half-mile line.
It had doubtless occurred to him that during past winters it had been
necessary to eat, and he was coming forth to make peace with the
groceryman.

At sight of the approaching debtor, the lounging line of creditors
sprang to its feet and stood at attention. The grocer, who spoke the
Omaha tongue fluently and had a snug fortune laid away in consequence,
walked rapidly in advance of the others and met Mr. Rainwalker at the
line, followed by the straggling crowd of expectant creditors like a
trailing cloud of hungry crows.

Mr. Rainwalker had a large, round, pockmarked face that looked for the
world like a pumpkin pie overbaked by a careless cook, with a monstrous
nose in the centre of it. He sat placidly upon his pony, that had
all the salient points of a starved cow, and dozed luxuriously at the
shortest halt. The old chief seemed the visible body of an optimistic
joke, sitting upon the bone heap of a tragedy!
