THE CREW OF THE BOAT
OFFICERS:
Commander (the Old Man--also addressed as Herr Kaleun, the standard
naval abbreviation of his full title, Herr Kapitänleutnant)
First Watch Officer
Second Watch Officer
Chief Engineer (the Chief)
Second Engineer
Narrator--a naval war correspondent
PETTY OFFICERS AND SEAMEN ("LORDS"):
Ario--diesel stoker
Bachmann ("Gigolo")--diesel stoker
Behrmann ("Number One")--bosun
the Bible scholar--control-room assistant
Bockstiegel--seaman
Dorian ("the Berliner")--bosun's mate
Dufte--seaman
Dunlop--torpedo man
Fackler--diesel stoker
Franz--chief mechanic
Frenssen--diesel mechanic mate
Hacker--torpedo mechanic
Hagen--E-stoker
Herrmann--sound man
Hinrich--radioman
Isenberg ("Tin-ear Willie")--control-room mate
Johann--chief mechanic
Katter ("Cookie")--cook
Kleinschmidt--diesel mechanic mate
Kriechbaum--navigator
Little Benjamin-helmsman
Markus--helmsman
Pilgrim--E-mate
Rademacher--E-mate
Sablonski--diesel stoker
Schwalle--seaman
Turbo--control-room assistant
Ullmann--ensign
Wichmann--bosun's mate
Zeitler--bosun's mate
Zörner--E-stoker
and fourteen others unnamed. The normal crew for a boat of this class was
50; on this voyage, however, the Second Engineer was a supernumerary, on
board for duty training.
This book is a novel but not a work of fiction. The author
witnessed all the events reported in it; they are the sum of his
experiences aboard U-boats. Nevertheless, the description of the
characters who take part are not portraits of real persons living or
dead.
The operations that form the subject of the book took place
primarily in the fall and winter of 1941. At that time the turning point
was becoming apparent in all the theaters of the war. Before Moscow, the
troops of the Wehrmacht--only a few weeks after the battle of
encirclement at Kiev--were brought to a standstill for the first time. In
North Africa the British troops went on the offensive. The United States
was providing supplies for the Soviet Union and itself became--
immediately after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor--a nation at war.
Of the 40,000 German U-boat men in World War II, 30,000 did not
return.
I BAR ROYAL
From the officers' billet in the Hotel Majestic to the Bar Royal
the coast road describes a single extended curve three miles long. The
moon is not yet up, but you can make out a pale ribbon of a road.
The Commander has the accelerator all the way down, as if this were
a race. Suddenly he has to brake. The tires scream. Brake, release, brake
again fast. The Old Man handles it well, and without skidding, the heavy
car comes to a stop in front of a wildly gesticulating figure. Blue
uniform. Petty officer's cap. What insignia on his sleeve?--U-boat man!
He's standing just outside the beam of our headlight, waving his
arms. His face in darkness. The Commander is about to start forward
slowly when the man begins to beat with the palms of his hands on the
radiator hood, bellowing:
You bright-eyed little fawn, I'll get you,
I'll break your little heart in two.
A pause, more fierce drumming on the hood and more bellowing.
The Commander's face is grim. He's about to explode. But no, he
shifts into reverse. The car leaps, and I nearly crack my head on the
windshield.
Low gear. Slalom curve. Screeching tires. Second gear..
"That was our Number One!" the Commander informs me. "Tight as a
tick."
The Chief Engineer, sitting behind us, swears unintelligibly.
The Commander has barely gotten up speed when he has to brake
again. But he has a liule more warning this time, because the swaying
line caught in our headlights is still some way ahead. At least ten men
straight across the road, all sailors in shore uniform.
Flies open, cocks out, a single cascade of urine.
The Old Man sounds the horn. The line parts and we drive between
two rows of men pissing at attention.
"We call that the watering cart--they're all from our boat."
Behind us the Chief growls.
"The rest are in the whorehouse," the Commander says. "They'll be
doing rush business there tonight. You know Merkel is moving out in the
morning too."
For almost a mile not a soul to be seen. Then in our headlights a
double file of military police.
"Let's hope none of our boys are missing in the morning," says the
voice from behind us. "When they're drunk they like to go after the shore
patrols--"
"Don't even recognize their own Commander," the Old Man mutters to
himself. "That's going too far."
He's driving slower now.
"I'm not feeling so fresh myself," he says half over his shoulder.
"Too much ceremony for one day. First the funeral this morning-- for that
bosun who caught it in the air attack at Châteauneuf. And in the middle
of the funeral another attack--terrific fireworks. It isn't decent--
particularly during a funeral! Our flak brought down three bombers."
"And what else?" I ask the Old Man.
"Nothing today. But that execution yesterday turned my stomach.
Desertion. Clear case. A diesel engineer. Nineteen years old. Let's not
talk about it. And then in the afternoon that hog slaughter at the
Majestic. Probably meant to be a banquet. Pudding broth, or whatever the
stuff's called--nobody liked it."
The Old Man stops in front of the _établissement_; on the garden
wall a sign in letters three feet high proclaims BAR ROYAL. It's a 
creation in concrete, shaped like a ship, between the shore road and a
secondary road coming in at a sharp angle from the pine forest. Straight
across the front--on the ship's bridge--a picture window like a great
superstructure.
Monique's the entertainer in the Bar Royal. A girl from Alsace who
knows only scraps of German. Black hair, dark eyes, all temperament and
tits.
Besides Monique, the attractions are three waitresses with peekaboo
blouses and a three-man band, nervous and insipid except for the drummer,
a mulatto, who seems to enjoy what he's doing.
The Todt Organization had requisitioned the place and had it
repainted. Now it's a mixture of Fin de Siècle and German House of Art.
The mural above the orchestra platform represents the five senses or the
Graces. Five Graces--three Graces? The U-boat Commander-in-Chief took the
place away from the Todt Organization on the grounds that "U-boat
soldiers need relaxation"; "U-boat officers can't spend all their time in
whorehouses"; "We need a more refined atmosphere for our men."
The more refined atmosphere consists of tattered carpets,
splitleather chairs, white latticework adorned with artificial grapevines
on the walls, red shades on the wall lights, and faded red silk curtains
over the windows.
The Commander looks around the room with a grin, stares
magisterially at the groups at various tables, his chin pulled back and
his forehead furrowed. He then methodically straightens a chair, lets
himself drop heavily into it, and stretches his legs out in front. The
waitress Clementine immediately comes tripping up to him, breasts
bobbing; the Old Man orders beer all round.
Before it arrives, the door bursts open and a group of five men
crowds in, all lieutenant-commanders by the stripes on their sleeves--and
behind them three lieutenants and a second lieutenant. Three of the
lieutenant-commanders are wearing white caps: U-boat officers.
Against the light I recognize Flossmann. An unpleasant, irascible
individual, square-built and blond, who recently boasted that during his
last patrol, in the course of an artillery attack on an unescorted
vessel, the first thing he had done was to open fire on the lifeboats
with a machine gun, "to make our position clear.. ."
The other two are Kupsch and Stackmann, the inseparables, who were
heading home on leave when they got stuck in Paris and since then have
been overflowing with whorehouse talk.
The Old Man growls, "Another hour and the whole U-Force will be
here. I've been wondering for a long time why the Tommies haven't smashed
this shop in one of their dashing commando raids, along with the
Commander-in-Chief in his little castle at Kernével. Can't understand why
_that_ shop hasn't been taken--so close to the water and right next to
all that mess around Fort Louis. As for us sitting here, they could take
us with a lasso if they wanted to. This'd be a good night for it."
The Old Man has neither the thin, thoroughbred face nor the wiry
figure of the picture-book U-boat heroes. He looks rather ordinary, like
the captain of a Hamburg--America liner, and he moves heavily.
The bridge of his nose is narrow in the middle, bends to the left,
and broadens out. His bright blue eyes are hidden under brows that are
permanently frowning from so much concentrated staring at the sea.
Usually he keeps his eyes so nearly closed that you only see two slits
and, at their outer corners, a burst of wrinkles. His lower lip is full, 
his chin strongly modeled; by early afternoon it is covered with reddish
stubble. The rough, strong features give his face a look of gravity.
Anyone not knowing his age would put him in his forties; he's really ten
years younger. But given the average age of commanders, he is already an
old man at thirty.
The Commander is not given to grandiloquence. In his official
reports, his accomplishments sound like child's play. It's hard to get
anything out of him. Usually we understand each other by an exchange of
fragmentary phrases, tangential speech. A mere hint of irony, a slight
pursing of the lips, and I know what he really means. When he praises Uboat Headquarters, looking crosswise past me, it's clear what he means to
convey.
Our last night ashore. Beneath the babble of talk always the
nagging anxiety: Will it be all right? Will we make it?
To calm myself I reason it out: the Old Man--a first-class
commander. Unflappable. No slavedriver. No crazy, bloodthirsty daredevil.
Reliable. Has served on sailing ships. Has always come through. Two
hundred thousand tons--destroyed a whole harborful of ships. Always got
away, even out of the worst jams
My heavy sweater will be useful if we head north. I've told Simone
not to come with me to the harbor. It would only cause trouble. The
Gestapo idiots watch us like lynxes. Envious pigs. The Dönitz Volunteer
Corps--they can't touch us.
No notion where we are really headed. Mid-Atlantic probably. Not
many U-boats out there. A very bad month. Strengthened defenses. The
Tommies have learned a lot of new tricks. The tide has turned. The
convoys are excellently guarded these days. Prien, Schepke, Kretschmer,
Endrass all attacked convoys. And they all got it at almost the same
time--in March. For Schepke it was especially nasty. Jammed between the
periscope housing and the tower's armor plate when the destroyer rammed
his bombed-out tub. The aces! There aren't many left. Endrass's nerves
were shot. But the Old Man is still intact, a model of perfect calm.
Introverted. Doesn't destroy himself with booze. Seems completely relaxed
as he sits there lost in thought.
I have to leave for a minute. In the toilet I hear two officers of
the watch standing beside me at the yellow-stained tile wall. "Have to go
unload it."
"Don't stick it in the wrong place. You're really pissed."
When the first one is already halfway through the door, the other
roars after him, "While you're at it, stuff in greetings and salutations
from me too!"
Men from Merkel's boat. Drunk, otherwise they wouldn't be spouting
filth like that.
I return to the table. Our Chief Engineer is angling for his glass.
An entirely different man from the skipper. Looks like a Spaniard, with
his black eyes and pointed black beard, a portrait by El Greco. Nervous
type. But knows the ropes from A to Z. Twenty-seven years old. The
Commander's right hand. Has always sailed with the Old Man. They
understand each other without much talk.
"Where's our Second Watch Officer?" the Old Man wants to know.
"On board. Still on duty, but he'll probably turn up."
"Somebody has to do the work. And the First Watch Officer?"
"In the cathouse!" says the Chief, grinning.
"Him in the cathouse? Don't make me laugh! Probably writing his
will--that's one man who always has everything in order."
About the apprentice engineer, who is going to be joining the crew
on this voyage and is supposed to take over the Chief's job afterward,
the Old Man doesn't ask at all.
So there will be six of us in the Officers' Mess, a lot of men at
one small table.
"What's become of Thomsen?" asks the Chief. "He wouldn't just stand
us up."
Philipp Thomsen, a commander of the UF and very recent recipient of
the Ritterkreuz, had reported in during the afternoon. Seated deep in a
leather chair, elbows propped up, hands folded as though in prayer, his
eyes staring grimly over them at the opposite wall. ". . . we were then
harried for three quarters of an hour by depth bombs. Right after the
explosion, at a depth of about two hundred feet, we took six to eight
canisters fairly close to the boat. Flat pattern. One especially well
placed, about the height of our gun and over two hundred feet to one
side, hard to be more precise. The others all fell eight hundred to a
thousand yards away. Then an hour later, another series. That was in the
evening, about 23.00. At first we stay down and then make a silent run,
rising slowly. After that we surface behind the convoy. Next morning a
cruiser makes a dash in our direction. Wave force three, and moderate
wind. Rain squalls. Rather cloudy. Very favorable for surface attacks. We
submerge and position ourselves for the attack. Fire. Wide of the mark.
Then again. Destroyer proceeding at slow speed. Make a try with the stern
tube. That works. We then run behind the convoy until we receive orders
to turn about. The second convoy announced by Zetschke. We maintain
contact and supply running reports. Toward 18.00 we catch up with it.
Weather good, sea two to three. Fairly cloudy."
Thomsen paused. "Very odd; all our successes were on days when one
of the crew was having a birthday. Really extraordinary. The first time
it was the diesel stoker's. The second, a radioman's. The unescorted ship
went down on the cook's birthday, and the destroyer on the torpedo
technician's. Crazy, isn't it?"
Thomsen's boat had four pennants on its half-raised periscope when
it ran in early this morning with the flood tide. Three white ones for
merchant vessels and a red one for the destroyer.
Thomsen's hoarse voice rang out like the bark of a dog over the
oil-covered, brackish water. "Both engines twice stop!"
The boat still had headway enough to glide noiselessly up to the
pier. Its outlines were sharp; out of the sticky, oily scum of the
stinking harbor water it rose like a tall vase with a much too tightly
bunched bouquet in it. Not much color--a bunch of dried flowers. Blossoms
like pale patches amid the dark moss of beards. As they approached, the
patches became emaciated white faces. Chalky skin. Deeply shadowed hollow
eyes. Some glittered as though with fever. Dirty, gray, salt-crusted
leather clothes. Mops of hair under caps that,were almost sliding off.
Thomsen actually looked ill: thin as a scarecrow, his cheeks cavernous.
The grin on his face--certainly meant to be friendly--looked frozen.
"Respectfully report UF back from action against the enemy!"
Whereupon we: "Heil UF!" at full pitch.
From Supply Depot One an echoing squawk, and then another, weaker,
from the Penhoët wharf.
The Old Man is wearing his oldest jacket to show his contempt for
all the fancy dressers. The front of this ancient peajacket has long
since ceased to be blue and is more of a faded gray filmed with dust and
spots. The once-golden buttons are green with verdigris. His dress shirt
is also an indefinable color--lilac shading into bluegray. The black,
white, and red ribbon of his Ritterkreuz is no more than a twisted
string.
"This is not the old gang," the Old Man complains, casting an
appraising glance over a circle of young watch officers at the center
table. "These are the tadpoles--all booze and big talk."
Lately two groups have formed in the bar: the "old warriors," as
the Old Man's crewmates call themselves, and the "young strutters," the
philosophically oriented youngsters with faith in the Führer in their
eyes, the "chin-thrusters," as the Old Man calls them, who practice
intimidating looks in front of the mirror and clench their asses extratight, just because it's in style to move springily on the balls of the
feet with buttocks held in and body inclined slightly forward. I stare at
this assemblage of young heroes as though I were seeing them for the
first time. Hairline mouths with sharp grooves on either side. Rasping
voices. Swollen with their own superiority and crazy for medals. Not a
thought in their heads but "The Führer's eyes are upon you--our flag is
dearer than life."
Two weeks ago in the Majestic one of them shot himself because he'd
caught syphilis. "He gave his life for Volk and Vaterland," was what they
told his fiancée.
In addition to the crew of old warriors and young recruits there is
also the outsider Kugler, who sits with his first lieutenant close to the
washroom door. Kugler of the oak leaves, who keeps aloof from everyone.
Kügler, noble knight of the depths, Parsifal and torchbearer, unshakable
believer in Final Victory. Steel-blue eyes, proud bearing, not an ounce
too much fat--an immaculate example of the Master Race. With tapered
index fingers he shuts his ears when he prefers not to hear cowardly
misgivings or the sneers of doubting cynics.
The flotilla surgeon occupies a neighboring table. He too has a
special position. His brain is stuffed with a collection of the most
astounding obscenities. Hence he is known concisely as "the filthy pig."
Nine hundred and ninety-five years of the thousand-year Reich are already
gone, in the opinion of the flotilla surgeon, an opinion broadcast
whenever he sees fit or is drunk.
At thirty, the surgeon enjoys universal respect. On his third
sortie against the enemy he took over command and brought his boat back
to base after the commander had been killed during a concentrated attack
by two aircraft and both lieutenants lay badly wounded in their bunks.
"Somebody die around here? What is this, a wake? What kind of place
is this anyway?"
"There's enough noise as it is," growls the Old Man, taking a quick
swallow.
Monique must have grasped what the surgeon was saying. She brings
the microphone close to her scarlet lips as though she means to lick it,
flourishes a bundle of violet-colored ostrich feathers with her left
hand, and bawls in a smoky voice, "_J'attendrai--le four et la nuit!_"
The drummer uses his brushes to evoke a sexy whisper from his
silver-mounted drum.
Shrieking, sobbing, moaning, Monique acts out the song with
contortions, undulating her opulent blue-white, shimmering breasts,
valiantly exercising her derriere and performing a lot of hocus-pocus
with the feather fan. She holds it behind her head like an Indian war
bonnet and taps her pouting lips rapidly with the flat of her hand. Then
she draws the fan up from behind and between her legs-- _le four et la
nuit_"--and rolls her eyes. Tender stroking of the feathers, bumps and
grinds toward the feather bush--drawn up again from below--hips swaying.
She pouts again and blows on her fluttering prop.
All at once she winks in the direction of the doorway, over the
heads of the men around the tables. Aha, U-boat Commander with his
adjutant! This beanpole topped by a diminutive schoolboy's face is hardly
worth more than a brief wink. He doesn't even give a smile of
recognition, but glares around as if looking for another door to escape
through unobserved.
"A highly distinguished visitor come to consort with the mob!"
roars Trumann, an especially recalcitrant member of the old guard, in the
midst of Monique's sobbing-- ". . . _car l'oiseau qui s'enfuit_." He
actually staggers over to the Commander-in-Chief's chair. "Come on, you
old Aztec, how about charging the front line? Come on, here's a good
spot--orchestra seat--the whole landscape from underneath . . . not
interested? Well, one man's meat is another man's . .
As usual, Trumann is dead drunk. His spiky mop of black hair is
covered with a drift of cigarette ash. Three or four butts have become
entangled in it. One still smoldering. He may burst into flames at any
moment. He wears his Ritterkreuz back to front.
Trumann's boat is known as "the barrage boat." Since his fifth
patrol his bad luck has become legendary. He's seldom at sea for more
than a week. "Crawling back on knees and nipples," as he calls it, has
become a regular routine for him. Each time he has been caught during his
approach to the theater of operations: bombed by flyers, harried by depth
bombs. And there were always malfunctions--broken exhaust pipes, ruptured
compressors--but no targets. Everyone in the flotilla is privately amazed
that he and his men can bear up under their totally disastrous lack of
success.
The accordion player stares over his folded bellows as if he'd seen
a vision. The mulatto is cut off somewhere around the level of his third
shirt button by the moon of his big drum: either he's a dwarf or his
stool is too low. Monique makes her roundest and most carplike mouth and
moans into the microphone. "In my solitude. . ." And Trumann leans closer
and closer to her until he suddenly shouts, "Help--poison!" and throws
himself over backward. Monique falters. He thrashes about, then starts to
get up again and bellows, "A real flame-thrower--she must have eaten a
whole string of garlic--god-oh-god-oh-god!"
Trumann's Chief, August Mayerhofer, appears. Since he wears the
German Cross on his jacket, he's known as "August of the Fried Egg."
"Well, how did it go in the whorehouse?" Trumann yells at him. "Are
you all fucked out? It's good for the complexion. Old Papa Trumann
certainly ought to know by now."
At the next table they're bawling in chorus: "0 thou We-es-sterwald
The flotilla surgeon is leading the halting choir with a wine bottle.
There is a big round table close to the podium, which by tacit consent is
reserved for the old guard; in the leather chairs around it only the Old
Man's friends and contemporaries sit or sag, more or less drunkenly: 
Kupsch and Stackmann, "the Siamese Twins"; Merkel, "the Ancient";
Kortmann, "the Indian." They are all prematurely gray, naval gladiators
from the word go, who act nonchalant although they know better than
anyone what their chances are. They can loll for hours at a time--almost
motionless. On the other hand, they can't lift a glass without shaking.
They all have more than half a dozen difficult missions behind
them, they all have been through the worst kind of nervous tension,
refined torture, hopeless situations that swung around to their advantage
by some sheer miracle. Not one of them who hasn't come back with a
wrecked boat, against all expectation--upper deck demolished by aircraft
bombs, conning tower rammed in, stoved-in bow, cracked pressure hull. But
each time they did come back, they were standing bolt upright on the
bridge, acting as though the whole mission had been mere routine.
To act as though everything were a matter of course is part of the
code. Howling and chattering of teeth are not allowed. U-boat
Headquarters keeps the game going. For Headquarters, anyone who still has
a neck and a head and all four extremities attached to his torso is all
right. For Headquarters, you're certifiable only when you start to rave.
They should long ago have sent out fresh, unscathed men to replace the
old commanders in the front-line boats. But, alas, the unscathed novices
with their unshaken nerves happen to be far less competent than the old
commanders. And the latter make use of every conceivable trick to keep
from parting with an experienced watch officer who is really ready to
become a commander.
Endrass should never have been allowed to put to sea again in his
condition. He was completely done in. But that's the way it goes: U-boat
Headquarters has been struck by blindness. They don't see when someone is
on his last legs, or they don't want to see. After all, it's the old aces
who brought in the successes--the contents of the little basket for
special communiqués.
The combo takes a break. I can again hear fragments of
conversation.
"Where is Kallmann?"
"He certainly won't be coming!"
"You can see why!"
Kallmann came in the day before yesterday with three victory
pennants on his half-raised periscope--three steamers. He sank the last
one, in shallow coastal waters, with his cannon. "It took more than a
hundred rounds! We had a heavy sea. With our boat hove to, we had to
shoot at an angle of forty-five degrees. We got the one before that at
about 19.00 in the twilight--an underwater shot. Two hits on a twelve
thousand gross registered tons--one miss. Then they were after us. Tin
cans for eight long hours. They probably used up everything they had on
board!"
With his hollow cheeks and his wispy blond beard, Kallmann looked
like Jesus on the cross. He kept twisting his hands as if each word were
being dragged out of him.
We listened intently, disguising our uneasiness with an exaggerated
show of interest. When would he finally ask the question we were
dreading?
When he had finished, he stopped twisting his hands and sat
motionless, palms pressed together. And then gazing past us over his
fingertips he asked with forced indifference, "What news of Bartel?"
No answer. The Commander-in-Chief let his head nod fractionally.
"So--well, I guessed it when there was no further radio contact." A
minute of silence, then he asked urgently, "Doesn't anyone know anything
at all?"
"No."
"Is there still a chance?"
"No."
Cigarette smoke hung motionless in front of their mouths.
"We were together the whole time at dock. I ran out with him too,"
he said finally. Helpless, embarrassed, It made you want to vomit. We all
knew what close friends Kallmann and Bartel were. They always managed to
put to sea together. They attacked the same convoys. Once Kallmann had
said, "It stiffens your spine if you know you're not alone."
Bechtel comes through the swinging door. With his pale, pale hair,
eyelashes, and eyebrows, he looks half scalded. When he is as pale as
this, his freckles stand out.
A big hello. He's surrounded by a group of the younger men. He has
to stand them drinks, because he's been "reborn." Bechtel has gone
through an experience that the Old Man described as "really remarkable."
After a fierce pursuit with depth bombs and all sorts of damage to his
ship, he surfaced in the gray of dawn to find a hissing canister lying in
front of his cannon on the upper deck. The corvette still in the
neighborhood and the live bomb in front of the conning tower. It had been
set to go off at a greater depth and so hadn't exploded when it fell on
Bechtel's upper deck at two hundred feet. He immediately ordered both
diesels full speed ahead and the bosun had to roll the depth charge
overboard like a barrel of tar. "It blew twenty-five seconds later. So it
was set for three hundred feet." And then he had to dive again and took
twenty more depth charges.
"I would certainly have brought that firecracker back with me,"
Merkel shouted.
"We'd have liked to. Only we couldn't stop that damn hissing.
Simply couldn't find the button. Absolutely hilarious!"
The room is getting more and more crowded. But Thomsen is still
missing.
"Where d'you suppose he can be?"
"Perhaps he's getting in one last quick one."
"In the shape he's in?"
"With the Ritterkreuz around your neck, it must give you a whole
new sensation."
During the awarding of the Ritterkreuz by the Commander-inChief of
the U-boats this afternoon, Thomsen had stood as rigid as an iron statue.
He had such a grip on himself that there was practically no color in his
face. In his condition he could hardly have heard a word of the C-in-C's
rousing speech.
"He'd better look out or I'll eat that lousy cur of his," Trumann
had muttered at the time. "The bitch is there every time he reports in.
We're not running a zoo here."
"Toy soldier!" he now adds as the Commander-in-Chief withdraws
after a manly handshake and a piercing glance. And, cynically to those in
the circle, "Great wallpaper," pointing at the photographs of the dead on
the three walls, one little black-framed picture after another. "There
beside the door, there's still space for a few more!"
Already I can see whose photo is going to appear next: Bechmann's.
Bechmann should have been back long ago. The three-star
announcement is sure to be issued very soon. They took him off the Paris
train stinking drunk. It required four men to get him out--the express
had to wait while they did it. You could have hung him over a
clothesline. Completely fucked out. Albino eyes. And that's the shape he
was in twenty-four hours before putting to sea. How in god's name did the
flotilla surgeon get him on his feet again? Probably an airplane caught
him. Shortly after he cleared port, reports from him ceased. Hard to
believe. The Tommies are coming in now as close as channel buoy Nanni I.
I'm reminded of Bode, the naval staff officer in Kernével, a
solitary old man who used to get drunk all alone late at night in the
wardroom. Thirty boats had been lost in a single month. "You could turn
into a drunk, if you drank to each of them."
Flechsig, heavy and uncouth, one of the Old Man's last crew, throws
himself into the last empty chair at our table. He got back from Berlin a
week ago. Since then, he's hardly said a word. But now he breaks out.
"D'you know what this idiot monkey said to me, this dolled-up staff
heinie? 'The right of commanders to wear white caps is not expressed in
any of the regulations regarding uniforms!' I said, 'Would respectfully
suggest that the omission be rectified.'"
Flechsig takes a couple of powerful swigs of Martell from a tumbler
and methodically wipes his mouth with the back of his hand.
Erler, a young lieutenant who has completed his first patrol as
commander, keeps opening the door so hard that it bangs against the
doorstop. From his breast pocket dangles the end of a rosecolored slip.
Back from leave just this morning, by afternoon he was in the Majestic
waxing eloquent about his experiences. As he told it, they had held a
torchlight parade for him back in his home town. He could prove it all
with clippings from the newspapers. There he stood on the Rathaus
balcony, his right hand raised in the German salute: a German sea hero
hailed in his home town.
"Well, he'll quiet down later on," mutters the Old Man.
In Erler's wake come the radio commentator Kress, an oily,
intrusive reporter with exaggerated ideas of his own importance, and the
former provincial orator, Marks, who now writes inflated inspirational
articles on Endurance. They look like Laurel and Hardy in Navy uniforms,
the radio creature tall and lanky, the enduring Marks fat and nobbly.
At their appearance the Old Man gives an audible snort.
The favorite word of the radio people is "continuously," the
"continuously increased effort" in munitions, victory statistics, will to
attack. Everything must press on con--tin--u--ous--ly.
Erler plants himself in front of the Old Man and snappily invites
him to a round of drinks. For quite a while the Old Man does not react at
all, then he lays his head to one side as if for a shave and announces
distinctly, "We always have time for a quick swig!"
I already know what comes next. In the middle of the room Erler
demonstrates his method of uncorking champagne bottles with a single
sharp blow of the back of a knife against the bulge in the neck. He's
great at it. The cork and the glass lip fly off without leaving a
splinter and the champagne shoots up as though from a foaming fire
extinguisher. I am instantly reminded of an exercise of the Dresden fire
department. In front of the Opera House they had erected a steel mast
with a swastika made of pipes in celebration of Reich Fire Prevention
Day. Around the mast a herd of red firewagons had been drawn up. The 
immense square was jammed with an expectant crowd. The command was barked
from the loudspeaker: "Foam, forward march!" and out of the four ends of
the swastika shot the foam; it began to rotate, faster and faster,
becoming a spouting windmill. The crowd went "Aaah!" And the foam
gradually turned rosy, then red, then violet, then blue, then green, then
yellow. The crowd applauded while an ankle-deep slime of analine spread
out in front of the Opera House. . . .
Again the door crashes open. It's Thomsen--at last. Half supported,
half pushed by his officers, he staggers in, glassy-eyed. I quickly drag
up a chair so that we can take him into our circle.
Monique is singing: "Perhaps I am Napoleon, perhaps I am the King.
. ."
I gather the wilted flowers from the table and strew them over
Thomsen's head. Grinning, he allows himself to be adorned.
"Where's the Commander-in-Chief hiding?" asks the Old Man.
It's the first time we realize that the C-in-C has disappeared
again. Before the real celebration has begun. Kugler is no longer here
either.
"Cowardly bastards!" Trumann growls, then rises laboriously and
staggers off between the tables. He returns with a toilet brush in his
hand.
"What the hell's that thing for?" the Old Man bursts out.
But Trumann only staggers closer. He places himself in front of
Thomsen with his left hand propped on our table, breathes deeply a couple
of times, and at the top of his voice roars, "Silence in the cathouse!"
Instantly the music stops. Trumann moves the dripping toilet brush
up and down right in front of Thomsen's face and babbles tearfully, "Our
magnificent, esteemed, abstinent, and unwed Führer, who in his glorious
ascension from painter's apprentice to the greatest battle-leader of all
time . . . is something wrong?"
Trumann wallows for a few seconds in boozy emotion before going on
to declaim, "The great naval expert, the unexcelled ocean strategist, to
whom it has occurred in his infinite wisdom . . . how does it go from
there?"
Trumann throws a questioning glance around the circle, belches
deeply, and starts up again. "The great naval leader who showed that
English bedwetter, that cigar-smoking syphilitic . . . ha, what else has
he dreamed up? Let's see . . . has shown that asshole of a Churchill just
who knows which end is up!"
Trumann lets himself sink back into his chair exhausted, and blows
his Cognac breath straight into my face. In the bad light he looks green.
". . . we dub him knight--we consecrate the new knight! The shitty clown
and the shitty Churchill!"
Laurel and Hardy force their chairs into our circle. They're brownnosing Thomsen, using his drunkenness to learn something about his last
patrol. No one knows exactly why they spend their time trying to get
interviews for their clichéd articles. But Thomsen is long past the point
of communication. He stares at the two almost idiotically and simply
growls as they busily put words in his mouth: "Yes, exactly right--blew
up promptly--as expected! A hit just beyond the bridge--Blue-Funnel
Steamer. D'you understand? No, not _funny_--funnel!"
Kress feels that Thomsen is stringing him along and swallows dryly.
Looks like a fool with his Adam's apple bobbing up and down.
The Old Man is enjoying his embarrassment and wouldn't dream of
helping him out.
Thomsen is finally incapable of taking in anything at all.
"All shit! Shitty fish!" he shouts.
I know what he means. In the last few weeks there's been one
torpedo failure after another. So many defects are no accident. There's
been talk of sabotage.
Suddenly Thomsen springs to his feet, terror in his eyes. Glasses
fall and break. The telephone has rung. He must have mistaken it for the
alarm bell.
"A can of pickled herring!" he now demands, swaying heavily.
"Pickled herring all around!"
I half hear fragments of what Merkel is reporting to his group,
behind me.
"The chief petty officer was good. First-class man. The diesel
mechanic I've got to get rid of, he's a dead loss . . . The corvette was
at position zero. The chief was slow in getting the lifeboat down . . .
There was one man swimming around in the drink. Looked like a seal. We
ran up to him because we wanted to know the name of the ship. Black with
oil. Hanging onto a buoy."
Erler has discovered that it makes a murderous noise if you run an
empty wine bottle along the ribs of a radiator. Two, three bottles burst,
but he doesn't give up. Scattered glass crunches under foot. Monique
throws him a furious look because she can hardly make her groans heard
over the uproar.
Merkel staggers to his feet and gives himself a thorough scratching
between the legs through his trouser pocket. Now his Chief Engineer
appears. This man is universally envied for his ability to produce a tune
on two fingers. He can do anything: the fanciest whistling, commando
signals, wild musical arabesques, tremulous fantasies.
He's feeling expansive and immediately agrees to teach me. First,
however, he has to go to the can. When he comes back he says, "Get going,
wash your paws!"
"Why?"
"If you're going to be difficult--okay--one hand will do."
After I've washed, Merkel's Chief thoroughly examines my right
hand. Then decisively pops my index finger and middle finger into his
mouth and begins to whistle a couple of trial notes. Soon a whole melody
emerges, getting gradually shriller and sharper.
He rolls his eyes as he plays. I'm stunned. Two more cascades of
sound, and finish. I examine my wet fingers with respect. I must pay
attention to the finger placement, says the Chief.
"Good." Now I try it, but only extract a couple of honking noises
and the sputter of a leaky pressure hose.
Merkel's Chief rewards my attempt with a despairing glance. Then
with an air of assumed innocence he puts my fingers in his mouth again
and out comes the sound of a bassoon.
We agree that it must have something to do with the tongue.
"Unfortunately, they're something you can't trade!" says the Old
Man.
"Youth without joy!" Kortmann roars unexpectedly during a pause in
the hubbub. Kortmann with his eagle's face: "the Indian." At U-boat
Headquarters in Kernével he's been in disgrace since the incident with
the tanker _Bismarck_. Kortmann, the disobeyer of orders. Rescuing German 
seamen! Taking his boat out of action to do so. Failing to follow orders
out of sentimentality! Could only happen to Kortmann, one of the old
guard with the antiquated credo branded on his brain: "Concern for the
fate of the shipwrecked is the first duty of every seaman!"
Much good it'll do him to roar, old-fashioned Herr Kortmann, whom
U-boat Headquarters finds a little slow on the uptake and who has not yet
noticed that requirements have become more rigorous.
Of course bad luck came into it as well. Did the English cruiser
have to turn up just when Kortmann was securely connected by fuel hose to
the tanker? The tanker had really been intended for the _Bismarck_. But
the _Bismarck_ didn't need any more fuel oil. The _Bismarck_ was at the
bottom of the ocean, along with twenty-five hundred men, and the tanker
was wallowing along, full to the brim and with no takers. Then Command
decided the U-boats should suck it dry. And just as Kortmann was
partaking, it happened. The Englishmen shot the tanker away from under
his nose, the fifty-man crew was floundering in the drink--and warmhearted Kortmann couldn't bring himself to let them go on floundering.
Kortmann was still proud of his catch. Fifty seamen on one VII-C
boat, where there's hardly room for the crew. How he stowed them away is
his secret. Probably by the canned sardine method: head to toe, and no
unnecessary breathing. Good old Kortmann certainly thought he'd performed
a miracle.
Drunkenness begins to wipe out the boundary between the old
warriors and the young strutters. They all try to talk at once. I hear
Böhler reasoning, "After all, there are guidelines--explicit guidelines,
gentlemen! Orders! Perfectly clear orders!"
"Guidelines, gentlemen, clear orders." Thomsen imitates him. "Don't
make me laugh. Nothing could be less clear!"
Thomsen glances up sideways at Böhler. Suddenly he has a devilish
gleam in his eye and is entirely aware of what's going on. "Actually,
it's part of their plan, all this uncertainty."
Saemisch sticks his carrot-colored head into the circle. He's
already half smashed. In the murky light, the skin on his face looks like
a plucked chicken's.
Böhler begins to lecture the carrothead. "Here's the way it is. In
total war the effect of our weapons can. .
"Pure propaganda rubbish," Thomsen jeers.
"Let me finish, will you? Now take this as an example. A support
cruiser fished a Tommy out of the drink who'd already been overboard
three times. What does that imply for us? Are we carrying on a war or
just a demolition campaign? What good is it if we sink their steamers and
then let them fish out the survivors so they can just sign on again? Of
course, there's a lot of money in it for them!"
Things are really hot, now that Böhler has opened up the burning
topic that is usually taboo: destroy the enemy himself or merely his
ships?
"That's neither here nor there," Saemisch insists. But here Trumann
breaks in. Trumann the agitator feels himself challenged. A thorny
problem that everyone ducks--except Trumann.
"Be a little systematic for once. U-boat Headquarters gives orders:
Destroy the enemy, with unswerving warlike spirit, with unfaltering
severity, implacable effort, and so on--all that crap. But U-boat
Headquarters hasn't said a word about attacking men who are struggling in
the water. Am I right?"
So leather-faced Trumann is wide enough awake to play provocateur.
Thomsen immediately jumps in. "Well, of course not. It has simply been
made un-mis-tak-ably clear that it is precisely the loss of crews that
hits the enemy hardest."
Trumann looks sly and stokes the fire a little. "So what?"
Thomsen, inflamed by the brandy, promptly protests. "Then everyone
has to decide for himself--very smart!"
Now Trumann really fans the flames. "There's one person who's
solved the problem in his own way and makes no bones about it. Don't
touch a hair of their heads, but shoot up the lifeboats. If the weather
happens to help them sink fast, so much the better--that's that! The
conventions have been respected. That's right, isn't it? U-boat
Headquarters can consider itself understood!"
Everyone knows who is meant, but no one looks at Flossmann.
I have to think about the stuff I want to take with me. Only what's
absolutely necessary. Certainly the heavy sweater. Cologne. Razor blades-
-I can do without them .
"The whole thing is a farce." Thomsen again. "As long as a man has
a deck under his feet you can shoot him down, but if the poor bugger is
struggling in the water, your heart bleeds for him. Pretty ridiculous,
isn't it?"
Trumann starts up again. "I want to explain what it really feels
like. . ."
"Yes?"
"If it's only one man, you imagine it could be you. It's only
natural. But no one can identify with a whole steamer. That doesn't
strike home. But a single man! Instantly it all looks different. That's
getting uncomfortable. So they patch an ethic together--and presto,
everything's beautiful again."
The heavy sweater that Simone knitted for me is terrific. Collar
reaching to the middle of the ears, all done in cable stitch; and it's
not an ass-freezer either, but nice and long. Maybe we'll really go
north. Denmark Road. Or all the way up. The Russian convoys. Lousy that
no one has any idea.
"But the men in the water really _are_ defenseless," Saemisch
insists in a plaintive, righteous voice.
It starts all over again.
Thomsen gestures in resignation, murmurs, "Oh shit!" and lets his
head slump.
I feel an urgent desire to get up and get out, to go pack my things
properly. One or two books. But which ones? No more brandy fumes! The
atmosphere in here would flatten a prize fighter. Try to keep my head
clear. Last night ashore. Extra films. My wide-angle lens. The fur-lined
cap. Black cap and white sweater. I'll certainly look silly.
The flotilla surgeon is supporting himself on outspread arms, one
hand on my left shoulder, the other on the Old Man's right, as though
about to perform on the parallel bars. The music has started up again;
over it he roars at the top of his voice, "Are we here for a Ritterkreuz
celebration or a philosophy session? Cut the bulishit!"
The surgeon's bellow startles a couple of officers to their feet
and they immediately proceed as if on cue. They get up on chairs and pour
beer into the piano, while a lieutenant-commander pounds the keys like
mad. One bottle after another. The piano swallows the beer
unprotestingly.
The combo and the piano don't make enough noise, so the phonograph
is turned on. At maximum volume: "Where's that tiger? Where's that
tiger?"
A tall blond lieutenant rips off his jacket, leaps smoothly into a
squat on the table and starts flexing his stomach muscles.
"Ought to be on the stage!"--"Fantastic!"--"Cut it out, you're
making me horny!" During the frenetic applause one man wraps himself up
comfortably in the red runner on the floor, puts the life preserver,
which has been hanging as a decoration on the wall, around his neck, and
goes right to sleep.
Bechtel, hardly one of nature's exhibitionists, stares into space
while clapping in time to a rumba that is demanding the utmost from the
belly dancer.
Our Chief, who until now has been sitting silently, thinking, also
gets out of hand. He climbs up the latticework attached to the wall above
the platform and, imitating a monkey, plucks away at the artificial
grapevine in time to the music. The lattice sways, remains standing for a
moment two feet from the wall, as in an old Buster Keaton film, then
crashes down with the Chief onto the platform. The piano player has his
head bent way back--as if he were trying to decipher some notes on the
ceiling--and bangs out a march. A group forms around the piano and bawls:
We'll march, march, march,
Though heaven rains down crap.
We're heading home to Slimeville,
From this asshole off the map.
"Classy, virile, Teutonic," growls the Old Man.
Trumann stares at his glass, and is galvanized; he springs to his
feet and roars, "_Skoal!_" From a good six inches above his mouth he
pours a stream of beer into himself, sending a broad flow of slobber down
his jacket.
"A real orgy!" I hear from Meinig, the dirtiest mouth in the
flotilla. "All that's missing is women."
As though that were a signal, Merkel's Numbers One and Two get up
and leave. Before reaching the door they exchange meaningful glances. I
thought they had already gone.
"Whenever you're scared, go get laid," mutters the Old Man.
From a neighboring table I make out:
Whenever passion seized him,
He'd leap up on the kitchen table
And screw the hamburger . . .
That's the way it always is. The Führer's noble knights, the
people's radiant future--a few rounds of Cognac washed down with some
Beck's beer and there goes our dream of spotless, shining armor.
"Remarkable," says the Old Man, reaching for his glass.
"This shit of a chair--can't get up!"
"Ha!" comes from someone in the neighborhood circle. "That's what
my girl says too. Can't get up again--can't get up again!"
The table is a wild mess of champagne bottles with broken necks,
ashtrays swimming with butts, pickled herring cans, and shattered
glasses. Trumann glances thoughtfully at this rubbish heap. When the 
piano finally stops for a moment, he raises his right hand and roars,
"Attention!"
"The tablecloth trick!" says our Chief.
Trumann carefully twists one corner of the cloth like a rope; he
takes a good five minutes because it gets away from him twice when it's
half ready. Then with his free left hand he gives a signal to the piano
player, who almost seems to have rehearsed the act, for he strikes a
flourish on the keys. Trumann settles his feet with the concentration of
a weightlifter, stands perfectly still for a moment staring at his two
hands as they grip the twisted corner of the cloth, and suddenly with a
primitive war whoop and a mighty swing of the arms, he pulls the cloth
halfway off the table. A jarring cascade of smashing glass, splintering
crash of bottles and plates falling to the floor.
"Shit--fucking shit!" he curses, and staggers crunching through the
shattered glass. He steers uncertainly for the kitchen and bellows for a
broom and shovel. Then amid the mad laughter of the whole crowd he crawls
around between the tables and grimly clears up the litter, leaving a
trail of blood behind him. The handles of the brush and the garbage
shovel are immediately smeared with it. Two lieutenants try to take the
implements away from Trumann but he obstinately insists on gathering up
every last splinter. "Clear up-- everything--must first be ord--ly,
cleared up--always just right, shipshape . . ."
Finally he lets himself down in his chair, and the flotilla surgeon
draws three or four splinters out of the balls of his thumbs. Blood
continues to drip on the table. Then Trumann rubs his bloody hands across
his face.
"Hell's teeth!" says the Old Man.
"Doesn't matter a shit!" Trumann roars, but allows the waitress to
apply small adhesive bandages, which she brings with a reproachful look
in her eyes.
He has hardly been in his chair five minutes when he pulls himself
to his feet again, yanks a crumpled newspaper out of his pocket and
yells, "If you've nothing else to say, you boneheads, here--here are some
golden words."
I see what he's holding: the will of Lieutenant-Commander
Monkeberg, who died ostensibly in combat but actually lost his life in a
completely unmilitary fashion, to wit, by breaking his neck. And his neck
broke somewhere in the Atlantic in a smooth sea, simply because the
weather was so fine and he wanted to go swimming. Just as he dived from
the conning tower, the boat rolled in the opposite direction and
Monkeberg cracked his head against the ballast tank. His manly swan song
was printed in all the papers.
Trumann holds the clipping out at arm's length. "All alike--one for
all--all for one--and so I say to you, comrades, only a unique
determination to fight--the background of this dramatic battle of
worldhistoric significance--anonymous heroic courage--historic grandeur--
wholly incomparable--standing alone--imperishable chapter of noble
endurance and martial sacrifice--the highest ideal--those living now and
those yet to come--to be fruitful--to prove oneself worthy of the eternal
heritage!"
Still holding the sodden and illegible piece of paper, he sways
back and forth, but he doesn't fall. His shoes seem stuck fast to the
floor.
"Crazy bugger," says the Old Man. "No one can stop him now."
A lieutenant sits down at the piano and starts playing jazz, but
this makes no difference to Trumann. His voice cracks. "We comrades--
standard-bearers of the future--life and spirit of a human elite with the
concept of 'service' as the highest ideal--a shining example for those
left behind--courage that outlives death--lonely resolve--calm acceptance
of fate--endless daring--love and loyalty of such boundlessness as you
rabble couldn't begin to conceive of-- more precious than diamonds--
endurance----_jawohl_--proud and manly--hurrah!--finds his grave in the
depths of the Atlantic. Hah! Deepest comradeship--battle front and
homeland--willingness to sacrifice to the utmost. Our beloved German
people. Our splendid God-sent Führer and supreme Commander. Hell! Hell!
Hell!"
Some of them join in. Böhler looks severely at Trumann, like a
governess, pushes himself up out of his chair to his full height, and
disappears without a word of farewell.
"You--you there, get away from my tit!" Monique screams. She means
the surgeon. Apparently he has made himself too companionable.
"Then I'll just crawl back inside my foreskin," he yawns and the
circle bursts into uproarious laughter.
Trumann collapses onto his chair and his eyelids droop. Maybe the
Old Man was mistaken after all. He's going to pass out right in front of
us. Then he leaps up as though bitten by a tarantula, and with his right
hand fishes a revolver out of his pocket.
An officer near him has enough reflexes left to strike down
Trumann's arm. A shot hits the floor, just missing the Old Man's foot. He
simply shakes his head and says, "Not even much of a bang with all this
music going on."
The pistol disappears, and Trumann sinks back in his chair, looking
sullen.
Monique, who has been slow to recognize the shot, springs out from
behind the bar, sashays her way past Trumann, stroking him under the chin
as though she were soaping him for a shave, then leaps quickly onto the
platform and moans into the microphone. "In my solitude. . ."
Out of the corner of my eye I see Trumann rise in slow motion. Re
seems to divide each movement into its individual components. He stands,
grinning craftily and swaying for at least five minutes until Monique has
finished her wailing, then during the frantic applause he feels his way
between the tables to the back wall, leans there a while still grinning,
and finally whips out a second pistol from his belt and shouts, "Everyone
under the table!" so loud that the veins in his neck stand out.
This time no one is close enough to stop him.
"Well?"
The Old Man simply stretches his feet out in front of him and
slides out of his chair. Three or four others take cover behind the
piano. The piano player has fallen to his knees. I too crouch on the
floor in an attitude of prayer. Suddenly there is dead silence in the
room--and then one bang after another.
The Old Man counts them aloud. Monique is under a table screaming
in a high voice that cuts to the bone. The Old Man shouts, "That's it!"
Trumann has emptied his magazine.
I peer over the edge of the table. The five ladies on the wall
above the platform have lost their faces. Plaster is still trickling
down. The Old Man is the first to get up and observe the damage, his head 
cocked to one side. "Fantastic performance--rodeo standard--and all done
with wounded fists!"
Trumann has already kicked the pistol away and is grinning with
delight from ear to ear. "About time, don't you think? About time those
loyal German cows got it, eh?"
He's almost delirious with self-satisfaction.
Hands in the air, shrieking in a high falsetto as if afraid for her
life, ready to surrender--enter the "madam."
When the Old Man sees her, he slides down out of his chair again.
"Take cover!" someone roars.
A miracle that this over-rigged old frigate, who functions as the
hostess here, has taken till now to put in an appearance. She has dolled
herself up Spanish-fashion, spitcurls plastered down in front of her ears
and a gleaming tortoiseshell comb in her hair--a wobbling monument with
rolls of fat bulging out all over. She's wearing black silk slippers.
There are rings with huge imitation stones on her sausage-like fingers.
This monster enjoys the special favors of the Garrison Commander.
Ordinarily her voice sounds like bacon sizzling in the pan. But now
she's yowling away in a string of curses. "Kaput, kaput," I manage to
distinguish in the general yammer.
"Kaput--she's right about that," says the Old Man.
Thomsen lifts a bottle to his mouth and sucks at the Cognac as if
from a nipple.
Merkel saves the situation. He clambers onto a chair and vigorously
begins to conduct a choir:
"Oh thou blessed Christmastide . . ." We all join in
enthusiastically.
The "madam" wrings her hands like a tragedienne. Her squeaks only
occasionally cut through our performance. She looks ready to tear her
spangled dress from her body, but then simply tears at her hair with her
dark-red lacquered nails instead, screeches, and rushes off.
Merkel falls from his chair, and the chorus ebbs away.
"What a madhouse! Christ, what a racket!" says the Old Man.
In any case, I think, I must take the warm bodyband along. Angora
wool. First-rate stuff.
The flotilla surgeon draws Monique onto his lap; he has hold of her
rear end with his right hand and with his left is raising her right
breast as if weighing a melon. The voluptuous Monique, straining in her
scrap of a dress, shrieks, tears herself loose, and collides with the
phonograph so that the needle shoots across the grooves with a dull,
groaning fart. She's giggling hysterically.
The surgeon pounds the table with his fists until the bottles jump,
and turns red as a turkey cock with repressed laughter. Someone puts both
arms around his neck from behind to embrace him, but when the hands
disappear, the surgeon's tie is cut short directly under the knot, and he
doesn't even notice. The lieutenant with the shears has already chopped
off Saemisch's tie, and then Thomsen's, and Monique, watching all this,
falls over backward on the stage having hysterics, and her wildly kicking
legs reveal that she's wearing only tiny black panties under her dress,
just a kind of G-string. "Wooden eye" Belser already has a siphon in his
hand and is directing a sharp stream up between her thighs, and she's
squealing like a dozen little pigs whose tails are being pinched. Merkel
notices that the ends of his tie are missing, the Old Man murmurs, 
"Cleancut raid," and Merkel seizes a half-filled Cognac bottle and hurls
it into the tie-cutter's stomach, doubling him up.
"Neat--perfect throw," the Old Man says approvingly.
And now a piece of the lattice flies through the air. We all duck
except for the Old Man, who sits there unmoved and grinning.
The piano gets another swallow of beer.
"Schnapps makes you im-po-tent!" Thomsen stammers.
"Back to the cathouse again?" the Old Man asks me.
"No. Just sleep. At least a couple of hours still."
Thomsen laboriously pulls himself to his feet. "With you--I'm
coming--fucking den of thieves--let's go--just one more stop at the
waterhole, one last good leak!"
The white moonlight beyond the swinging door hits me like a blow. I
wasn't prepared for light: a glitter of flowing silver. The beach a bluewhite strip in a cold fire of pure radiance; streets, houses, everything
bathed in icy, glowing neon light.
My god! There's never been a moon like this. Round and white like a
Camembert. Gleaming Camembert. You could read the paper by it with no
trouble at all. The whole bay a single sheet of glittering silver foil.
The enormous stretch from coast to horizon a myriad of metallic facets.
Silver horizon against velvet-black sky.
I narrow my eyes. The island beyond is a dark carp's back in the
dazzle. The funnel of a sunken transport, the fragment of a mast-- all
sharp as a knife edge. I prop myself against the low concrete wall; the
feel of pumice on the palms of my hands. Disagreeable. The geraniums in
the flowerboxes, each blossom separate and distinct. Mustard gas bombs
are supposed to smell like geraniums.
The shadows! The roar of the surf along the beach! I have the
groundswell in my head. The gleaming, spangled surface of the moonsea
bears me up and down, up and down. A dog barks; the moon is barking. . .
Where is Thomsen, the new knight? Where the hell is Thomsen? Back
into the Royal again. You could cut the air with a knife.
"What's become of Thomsen?"
I kick open the door to the can, careful not to touch the brass
knob.
There lies Thomsen, stretched out on his right side in a great
puddle of urine, a heap of vomit beside his head, blocking the urine in
the gutter. On top of the grating over the drain is a second great mess
of it. The right side of Thomsen's face is resting in this concoction.
His Ritterkreuz dangles in it too. His mouth keeps forming bubbles
because he's forcing sounds out. Through the gurgling I can make out,
"Fight on--victory or death. Fight on--victory or death. Fight on--
victory or death."
In a minute I'll be vomiting too. Rising nausea against the roof of
my mouth.
"Come on, on your feet!" I say between clenched teeth and seize him
by the collar. I don't want that mess on my hands.
"I wanted to--wanted to--tonight I wanted to--really fuck myself
out," Thomsen mutters. "Now I'm in no shape to fuck anything."
The Old Man appears. We take Thomsen by the ankles and wrists; half
dragging, half carrying him, we get him through the door. The right side
of his uniform is completely drenched.
"Give me a hand with him!"
I have to let go. I rush back into the can. In one great torrent
the entire contents of my stomach gush out onto the tile floor.
Convulsive retching. Tears in my eyes. I prop myself against the tile
wall. My left sleeve is pushed up and I can see the dial of my
wristwatch: two o'clock. Shit. At six thirty the Old Man is coming to
drive us to the harbor.
II DEPARTURE
There are two roads to the harbor. The Commander takes the somewhat
longer one, which runs along the coast.
With burning eyes, I observe the things we go past, the
antiaircraft batteries with their mottled camouflage in the gray morning
light. The signs for HEADQUARTERS--capital letters and mysterious
geometric figures. A wall of shrubbery. A couple of grazing cows. The
shattered village of Reception Immaculée. Billboards. A half-collapsed
kiln. Two cart horses being led by the halter. Late roses in untended
gardens. The splotched gray of house walls.
I have to keep blinking because my eyes still smart from all the
cigarette smoke. The first bomb craters; ruined houses that anflounce the
harbor. Heaps of old iron. Grass withered by the sun. Rusted canisters.
An automobile graveyard. Parched sunflowers bent over by the wind.
Tattered gray laundry. The half-riddled base of a monument. Parties of
Frenchmen in Basque berets. Columns of our trucks. The road descends into
the shallow river valley. Thick fog still hangs over this low ground.
A weary horse in the heavy mist hauling a cart, its two wheels as
tall as a man. A house with glazed roof tiles. A once-enclosed verandah,
now a mass of splintered glass and twisted ironwork. Garages. A fellow in
a blue apron, standing in a doorway, the wet butt of a cigarette stuck
onto his fleshy lower lip.
The clanking of a freight train. A siding. The riddled railway
station. Everything gray. Innumerable nuances of gray, from dirty
plaster-white to yellowish rusty-black. Sharp whistling of the shunting
engine. I feel sand between my teeth.
French dockworkers with black hand-sewn shoulder bags. Astonishing
that they go on working here despite the air raids.
A half-sunken ship with patches of red lead showing. Probably an
old herring boat that was to have been rebuilt as some kind of patrol
vessel. A tug pulls out into the shipping lane with a high forecastle and
the lines of its hull bulging underwater. Women with huge asses in torn
overalls, holding their riveting machines like machine guns. The fire in
a portable smithy glows red through the gray murk.
The cranes on their high stilts are all still standing--despite the
constant air attacks. The pressure waves from the detonations meet with
no resistance in their iron filigree.
Our car can't go any farther in the confusion of the railroad yard.
Rails bent into arches. The last few hundred yards to the bunker we have
to cover on foot. Four heavily bundled figures in single file in the
mist: the Commander, the Chief, the Second Watch Officer, and I. The
Commander walks bent over, his eyes fixed on the path. Over the stiff 
collar of his leather jacket his red scarf has worked its way up almost
to his spotted white cap. He keeps his right hand deep in the pocket of
his jacket; the left is hooked into the jacket by the thumb. Under his
left elbow he carries a bulging sailcloth bag. His bandy-legged gait is
made even heavier by his clumsy seaboats with their thick cork soles.
I follow two paces behind. Then comes the Chief. He walks in a kind
of unsteady bob. Rails that don't even check the Commander's stride force
the Chief to proceed in short, springing hops. He's not wearing leather
gear like us but gray-green overalls--like a mechanic wearing an
officer's cap. He carries his bag properly by the handle.
Last in line is the Second Watch Officer, the shortest of us all.
From his mutterings to the Chief, I make out that he's afraid the boat
will not be able to put out on time because of the fog. There is not so
much as a breath of air stirring in the dripping mist.
We go through a landscape of craters. In the depths of each
shellhole the fog has settled like thick soup.
The Second Watch Officer has the same kind of sailcloth bag under
his arm the Commander and I do. Everything we're taking on this patrol
must fit into it: a big bottle of cologne, woolen underwear, a bodyband,
knitted gloves, and a couple of shirts. I'm wearing the heavy sweater.
Oilskins, seaboots, and escape apparatus are waiting for me on the boat.
"Black shirts are best," the navigator had advised me and added
knowledgeably, "black doesn't show dirt."
The First Watch Officer and the apprentice engineer are already on
board with the crew, readying the boat for sea.
Over the harbor to the west the sky is still full of shadows, but
eastward above the roadstead, behind the black silhouette of the
freighter lying at anchor, the pale dawn light has already reached the
zenith. The uncertain hall-light makes everything strange and new. The
skeletal cranes that tower above the bare façade of the refrigeration
depot and the low roofs of the storage sheds are like charred black
stakes for giant fruit. On the tarpaper roofs, ships' masts have been
erected; along them coil white exhaust steam and oily black smoke. The
plaster on the windowless side of the halfbombed house has been attacked
by leprosy; it's falling away in big pieces. In huge white letters across
the dirty red background of the ruins swaggers the word BYRRH.
Overnight, hoar frost has spread like mildew over the rubble still
left from the last air raid.
Our path leads between ruins. Instead of the stores and inns that
once lined the streets there are now only splintered signs above empty
windows. Of the Café du Commerce only the "Comme" remains. The Café de la
Paix has disappeared into a bomb crater. The iron framework of a burnedout factory has folded inward into a gigantic thistle.
Trucks are coming toward us--a column of them, carrying sand for
the construction of the bunker channel. The wind from their passage picks
up empty cement bags and blows them against the legs of the Commander and
the Second Watch Officer. White plaster dust takes our breath away for a
moment and clings like meal to our boots. Two or three shattered cars
with Wehrmacht numbers lie overturned, their wheels in the air. Then more
charred timbers and blown-off roofs, lying like tents amid the twisted
railroad tracks.
"They've certainly messed the place up again," growls the
Commander. The Chief takes this for an important communication and
hurries up to him.
Then the Commander stops, clamps his sailcloth bag between his
legs, and systematically digs out of the pocket of his leather jacket a
shabby pipe and an old battered lighter. While we stand about, shivering
and hunched over, the Old Man carefully lights the already full pipe.
Now, like a steamer, he trails white clouds of smoke as he hurries along,
frequently turning back toward us. His face is twisted in a mournful
grimace. Of his eyes in the shadow of the Visor of his cap nothing at all
is visible.
Without taking his pipe from his mouth he asks the Chief in a
rasping voice, "Is the periscope in order? Has the blur been fixed?"
"_Jawohl_, Herr Kaleun. A couple of lenses came loose in their
cement bedding, probably during an air attack."
"And the trouble with the rudder?"
"All fixed. There was a break in the cable connection with the Emachine. That's why contact was intermittent. We put in a whole new
cable."
Beyond a line of billboards there is a long row of freight cars.
Behind them, the way leads straight across the tracks, then along a mudchoked road deeply rutted by the transport trucks.
Slanting iron bars armed with a thicket of barbed wire flank the
road. In front of the guardhouse, sentries stand with raised collars,
their faces hidden, like phantoms.
Suddenly the air is filled with a metallic clatter. This rattling
ceases abruptly and an increasingly shrill whistle from a siren, as
visible as a cloud of steam, hangs in the cold damp wind that smells of
tar, oil, and rotten fish.
More bursts of metallic sound. The air is heavy and pregnant with
them: we are in the wharf area.
To our left yawns a gigantic excavation, long strings of tip-cars
disappear into its murky depths. They puff and rattle about below.
"There are going to be new bunkers all over this area," says the
Old Man.
Now we're headed for the pier. Dead water under wads of fog. Ships
moored so close beside and behind one another that the eye can't even
distinguish their shapes. Battered, salt-encrusted fishing steamers, now
serving as patrol boats, strange floating vehicles such as lighters, oil
barges, harbor defense boats lying next to one another in packets of
three--the bedbug flotilla--that wholly unaristocratic confusion of
shabby, wornout work and supply boats that is now a part of every
commercial harbor.
The Chief points into the fog. "Over there--a bit to the right on
that six-story house--there's a car up there!"
"Where do you mean?"
"Over the gable of the supply shed--the house with the wrecked
roof!"
"How the hell did it get there?"
"Day before yesterday in the attack on the bunker. Bombs coming
down as big as phone booths. I saw that buggy fly up and land on the
roof--right on its wheels!"
"A circus act!"
"And the way the Frenchmen suddenly vanished. Couldn't believe it."
"What Frenchmen?"
"There's always a whole dockful of fishermen. You'll always find
some right beside the entrance to Pen Number One. You just can't get rid
of them."
"Of course they must have been keeping watch for the Tommies--which
boats go out and which of them make it back--with exact times!"
"They're not spying any more. When the alarm sounded they just sat
where they were, twenty or thirty of them--and then one of those huge
bombs smashed into the pier."
"It caught the bunker too."
"Yes, a direct hit--but it didn't penetrate. Twenty feet of
reinforced concrete."
Metal plates bend under our feet and spring back into their old
positions. A locomotive whistles a piercing cry of woe.
Beyond the heavy, bouncing figure of the Commander there slowly
emerges a concrete shape looming over everything. Its side walls are lost
in the fog. We hurry toward a bare front without cornice, doors, or
window openings. It looks like the side of a mighty foundation for a
tower planned to climb far above the clouds. Only the twenty-foot-thick
covering seems slightly out of proportion--a heavy load; it looks as
though it had jammed the whole structure some distance back into the
earth.
We have to make our way around blocks of concrete, railroad tracks,
piles of boards, and pipes as thick as a man's thigh. Finally we come to
the narrow side of the structure, an entrance protected by heavily
armored steel doors.
Furious riveting greets us from the dark interior. The rattling
stops occasionally, only to resume and grow to a thunderous uproar.
There is half darkness in the bunker. Only through the entranceways
from the harbor basin can a pale light penetrate into the concrete caves.
Two by two, the U-boats lie moored in their pens. The bunker has twelve
pens. Some of them are constructed as dry docks. The boxes are divided
from one another by huge concrete walls. The entrance to the pens can be
protected by lowering steel bulkheads.
Dust, fumes, the stink of oil. Acetylene torches hiss, welding
torches sputter, crackle, and howl. Here and there fireworks shoot up
from the blow torches.
We go in single file along the concrete ramp that leads straight
through the bunker at right angles to the docks. We have to be
scrupulously careful. Loose material is lying around everywhere.
Snakelike cables are trying to snare our feet. Railway cars block the
path. They're bringing in new machine parts. Vans are drawn up close to
the freight cars. On them, cradled in special supports, are the dully
shimmering torpedoes, dismounted cannon and anti-aircraft guns, and
everywhere pipes, hawsers, more cables, heaps of camouflage netting.
From the left, warm yellow light streams out of the windows of the
workshops, carpenter shops, smithies, machine shops, torpedo, artillery,
and periscope shops. Under this concrete roof a whole shipyard has been
installed.
The Commander turns back. The sudden flaming of a welding torch
illuminates his face with bluish light. Blinded, he squints. When the
noise lessens for an instant he shouts at the Chief, "Did anything
special turn up in dry dock?"
"Yes. The starboard propeller--bent blade."
"Aha, that was the singing noise we had at silent run!"
"New propellers--we've got brand-new propellers, Herr Kaleun!"
"Noiseless? Does the hydroplane work?"
"Yes, sir--the gear--took it apart--replaced the wheel--rusted
places--cogwheel--everything in order!"
In the pens to the right lie wrecks, disabled boats with patches of
rust and red lead showing. Smell of rust, paint, oil, putrid acids and
burned rubber, benzine, seawater, and rotten fish.
Beyond the flooded pens are the dry docks. Far below, inside one of
them, a boat lies with open belly, like an eviscerated whale. A whole
crowd of dockyard men are at work on it--small as dwarfs, insects around
a dead fish. At the moment large pieces of the outer skin are being cut
away with blow torches. The damaged hull shows its jagged edges in the
light of the flames. Compressed-air hoses in thick bundles and electric
cables hang out of the boat's interior. Vitals and entrails. The round
steel cylinder of the pressure hull is laid bare for the whole length of
the foreship. Over the diesel room there is an opening. Yellow light
streams from the inside of the boat. I can look deep into its guts. The
huge blocks of the diesel engines, the tangled mass of pipes and
conduits. Now the hook of the crane descends over the boat. A new load is
attached. It looks as if the boat were to be completely emptied out%
"They went through a heavy depth charge attack," says the Chief.
"Sheer miracle they got back with that bombed-out tub!"
The Commander leads the way to a concrete stairway descending into
the dry dock. The steps are smeared with oil; running down them are
insulated cables in thick bundles.
Again the hissing flame of a welding torch leaps up, plucking part
of the flooded bunker out of the half darkness. Farther back in the pen
more welding flames, and the whole boat is caught in their flickering
light. These are not the familiar stylish lines of surface vessels; from
the flat sides the forward hydroplanes extend like fins, amidships the
hull is distended. Thick rolls curve out to the right and left from the
belly--the buoyancy tanks. They are welded onto the boat like a saddle.
Everything is in a circular curve: a completely sealed and rounded-off
creature of the deep, with its own special anatomy. The ribs here are
closed rings.
Along one side of the bow a steel plate moves, opening up a dark
slot. Slowly the plate moves farther back, enlarging the hole. It widens
into a gaping mouth: an uncovered torpedo tube.
Two dockworkers try waving their arms in order to communicate above
the racket of the pneumatic hammers.
The torpedo tube cover closes again.
"Looks worse than it is. Pressure hull--still perfectly good--all
in order!" roars the Old Man.
I feel someone grasp my arm. The Chief is standing beside me, his
head cocked to one side, He is looking up over the rounded belly of the
boat.
"Fantastic, isn't it?"
From above, the guard looks down, his machine gun over his
shoulder.
We clamber over piles of scaffolding toward the stern. The ground
plan of the boat can be seen quite clearly. The extended steel cylinder
encloses the power plants, the batteries, and the living quarters. This
cylinder together with its contents is almost as heavy as the water it
displaces. It is a VII-C boat, like ours. I remember: length 220 feet; 
width 20 feet; displacement 1,005 cubic yards on the surface and 1,138
cubic yards submerged--a very small difference. The boat simply has very
few parts that rise above the surface. Draft on the surface 16 feet--an
average figure, for actually the draft is variable. One can alter it inch
by inch. The draft corresponds to the displacement of 66o tons of water
when the boat is on the surface.
In addition to our type, there is also Type II with 275 tons and
Type IX-C with i,ioo tons on the surface and 1,355 tons submerged. The
VII-C boat is the fighting craft best adapted to the Atlantic. It can
dive quickly and has great mobility. Its range of operations is 7,900
nautical miles on the surface at 10 knots, 6,500 nautical miles at 12
knots. Submerged, 8o nautical miles at 4 knots. The maximum speed is 17.3
knots on the surface and 7.6 knots submerged.
"He got it in the stern too. Rammed by a sinking steamer!" the
Chief yells in my ear.
Here and there Jupiter lamps stand on tripods. Plates that have
been dented are being hammered into shape again by a crowd of dockyard
workers. Not serious: this is only a part of the outer skin, which is not
pressure-resistant.
Of the true cylindrical core of the ship, the pressure hull, only a
portion is visible amidships. Toward stern and bow this hull is covered
by a thin outer skin, which camouflages the inflated deep-sea fish as a
low-lying surface vessel when it comes up for air. Along the entire
length of the boat the outer skin is pierced by holes and slits for
flooding so that water can penetrate into the spaces between it and the
real pressure hull. Otherwise the light disguise would be crushed like a
cardboard box by the weight of the water pressing on it.
The weight of the boat can be precisely controlled with the trim
tanks and the ballast tanks. Through a system of cells placed partly
outside and partly inside the pressure hull, the boat can be raised high
enough in the water for surface operation. The fuel tanks also lie
outside the pressure hull.
On the underside of one of the ballast tanks I catch sight of the
flooding hatches, which stay open when the boat is on the surface. The
ballast tanks, like air cushions, keep the boat floating. If the air
escapes through the valves in the top of the tanks, the water can rush in
through the flooding hatches. The lift disappears, the boat dives.
I let my eyes roam along the boat: the thick bulge is the fuel oil
tank. The hole over there is the cold-water intake for the diesels.
Somewhere here must be the submersion cells. They are pressureresistant,
as are the trim cells and the ballast tanks.
A worker begins to hammer furiously at some rivet heads.
The Commander has gone farther toward the stern. He points upward:
the boat's propellers are completely concealed by wooden scaffolding.
"He really got it," says the Old Man.
"Propeller shafts--getting--new lignum vitae bearings," roars the
Chief. "Probably making noise--depth bomb pursuit."
Directly above the propellers, the cover for the stern torpedo
tube. Halfway up, the flat surfaces of the stern hydroplanes grow out of
the curve of the side like stunted airplane wings.
A workman spattered with paint from head to foot almost knocks me
over. He has an enormous brush on an extra-long broom handle. While I'm
waiting for the Old Man, he begins to paint the belly of the boat dark
gray from underneath.
When we reach flooded Pen Six, the Commander once more turns aside
toward the boat moored at the right of the pier. "Here's the boat that
took a direct hit from a plane--Kramer's!"
Kramer's story is still in my ears. "Just as we're getting to the
surface I see a plane. The bomb doors open, down comes the bomb straight
at the bridge. I jerk my shoulder back for fear the bomb will hit it. The
thing actually crashes into the bulwark of the bridge-- but a little bit
askew, not head on. And instead of blowing up, it just flies to bits. A
dud."
The Commander inspects the conning tower from forward and aft, the
bizarre strip of rolled-up metal that the bomb has torn from the covering
of the tower, the broken cutwater. A sentry from the boat, bundled up
against the cold, advances and salutes.
"By rights, he should have been flying around in a white nightgown
for a good week already," says the Chief.
The basin of Pen Eight is also flooded. Reflections shiver and
intertwine on the surface.
"Our boat," says the Chief.
In the semi-darkness of the bunker the hull is hardly
distinguishable from the water. But against the pale wall the outlines
rising above the iow pier are more clearly defined. The upper deck lies
only a bare yard over the oily brackish water. All the hatches are still
open. I explore the entire length of the boat with my eyes as though to
imprint it on my mind for all time: the flat wooden deck that reaches
forward in one uninterrupted sweep to the bow; the conning tower with its
squat, bristling, anti-aircraft guns; the gently sloping stern; the steel
cables of the net guards with their interlaced green porcelain insulators
slanting forward and aft from the conning tower. Everything of the utmost
simplicity. A VuI-C boat, the most seaworthy of ships.
I catch a crooked grin on the Commander's face, like an owner
before a horse race.
The boat is ready for sea. Its tanks are filled with fuel oil and
water--cleared for departure. And yet it isn't throbbing with the
quivering, high-pitched hum of a ship ready to sail; the diesels aren't
yet running, although the wharf crew with their heavy gloves stand ready
with the hawsers.
"The official farewell takes place in the channel," says the
Commander. "With all the idiocy that goes with it."
The crew is drawn up on the upper deck behind the tower. Exactly
fifty men. (And me.) Eighteen-, nineteen-, and twenty-yearolds. Only the
officers and petty officers are a few years older.
In the semi-darkness I can't really make out their faces. Roll is
being called, but their clearly enunciated names escape me.
The upper deck is slippery from the fog that pours in through the
bunker gates. The grayish misty white is so dazzling that the outlines of
the exits are indistinct. The water in the basin is almost black and
looks as turgid as oil.
The First Watch Officer reports, "All hands present and accounted
for except control-room assistant Backer. Engine room ready, upper and
lower decks cleared for departure!"
"Thanks. Heil UA!"
"Heil, Herr Kaleun!" resounds throughout the pen above the wailing
of machinery.
"Eyes front! At ease!"
The Commander waits until the shuffling has subsided.
"You know that Backer's had it. Bombing raid on Magdeburg. A good
man--what a mess. And not even a single score on his last cruise."
Long pause. The Old Man looks disgusted.
"All right then--not our fault. But let's make sure we do things
better this time. Buck up."
Grins.
"Dismissed!"
"A fine speech," the Chief murmurs. "My respects!"
On the long, narrow upper-deck, fenders, cables, and new hawsers
are still lying about. Warm steam pours out of the open galley hatch.
Cookie's face appears. I hand my things down to him.
Noiselessly the periscope rises. Polyphemus eye turning in all
directions, it rises to full height on its gleaming silvery mast, then
sinks down again and disappears. I climb onto the conning tower. The
paint is not yet entirely dry and comes off on the palms of my hands. The
torpedo supply hatch on the upper deck is already closed. Aft, the galley
hatch is now sealed. The single remaining entrance to the boat is the
conning tower hatch.
Below, disorder reigns. One can move nowhere without pushing and
shoving. Hammocks bulging with loaves of bread swing to and fro.
Everywhere in the passages boxes of provisions, piles of canned food,
sacks. Where is all this stuff to be stowed? The last inch of space is
already full.
The designers of our boat have dispensed with the storage rooms
that on surface vessels are normally many and capacious--just as they
have dispensed with washrooms. They have simply built their machines into
this war tube and have persuaded themselves that, given the most
sophisticated deployment of the jungle of pipes and huge propulsion
engines, there would necessarily be enough nooks and crannies left over
for the crew.
The boat has taken on fourteen torpedoes. Five are in the tubes,
two in the upper-deck torpedo holders, and the remainder under the floor
plates--both aft and in the bow compartment. In addition, 120 shells for
the 8.8 millimeter cannon and a quantity of anti-aircraft ammunition.
The navigation officer and the bosun--Number One, in nautical
language--have their hands full. Number One is a powerful fellow called
Behrmann, who towers by a head over most of the crew. I already know him:
"_You bright-eyed little fawn, I'll get you_ . . ."
Still a half hour to sailing. I have enough time to take a look
around the engine rooms--an old love of mine, the engine rooms of ships
cleared for sea. In the control room I sit down for a moment on the water
distributor. All around me pipes, ventilators, hand wheels, manometers,
auxiliary engines, the confused tangle of intertwined green and red
electrical connections. In the half-darkness I recognize the hydroplaneposition indicators, one electrical and one mechanical--almost all the
systems are duplicated, for safety. Above the hydroplane station with its
push-button controls for electrical underwater steering, I can just make
out the trimming scales, one approximate and one exact. The Papenberg--a
depth indicator between the round dials of the depth manometers with
their clocklike hands--looks like a huge thermometer. During precise
maneuvering it shows the depth for periscopic observation to within three
inches.
The control room has pressure-resistant hatches fore and aft that
can withstand greater pressure because of their half-spherical shape. The
boat can be divided into three compartments by these two hatches.
There is not much advantage for us in this, for if one of the three
compartments is flooded, the boat is no longer able to float. The
designers probably had shallow waters in mind, like those of the Baltic.
The forward compartment has the torpedo supply hatch as the
emergency exit, the after compartment has the galley hatch.
The engine room--my goal--lies aft of the galley.
All doors have been opened.
I painfully work my way aft over chests and sacks through the petty
officers' quarters, where I am to sleep, and on through the galley, which
has not yet been cleared up either.
Our engine room cannot compare with the engine rooms of big ships,
those lofty halls usually extending from the top to the bottom of the
whole craft, with their many stages of gratings and stairways glistening
with oil, leading from story to story in a luster of polished copper and
shimmering steel beams. Ours, on the contrary, is a narrow cave in which
the two mighty diesels with all their auxiliary machines have to crouch
like cowering animals. Around them, no small corner amid the welter of
pipes is unused; there are cold-water pumps, lubrication pumps, oil
separators, compressed-air starting cylinders, fuel pumps. In between are
the manometers, thermometers, oscillation gauges, and every possible kind
of indicator.
Each of the two diesels has six cylinders. Together they develop
2,800 horsepower.
When the hatches are sealed, the public address system is the only
link with the control room. During battle, the floor here in the narrow
gangway between the mighty diesels is especially tricky, for the diesel
room holds most of the outboard plugs, the most vulnerable points in the
pressure hull.
The two master mechanics are still hard at work. Johann is a tall,
quiet, very pale, high-cheeked fellow who always looks calm and resigned;
he has wretched posture, is blond and almost beardless. The other, Franz,
is square, dark, and has a beard. He too is a chalk color, and stoops. He
looks bad-tempered.
At first I assumed that they were both called by their first names.
Now I know that Johann and Franz are family names. Johann's first name is
August, and Franz's is Karl.
Farther aft is the motor room. The E-motors are run by batteries,
which in turn are charged by the diesels. The E-motors develop 750
horsepower. Here everything is as clean, cold, and hidden as in a power
station.
The housing of the motors rises only a little above the gleaming
silvery floor plates. On both sides of the switching boxes are black
signs and a mass of ampere meters, output gauges, and voltage controls.
The motors work without drawing any air from outside. They are directcurrent machines which during underwater navigation are attached
directly, without gears, to the driving shafts behind the diesels. During
surface operations, when the diesels are running, they also serve as
dynamos to charge the batteries. At the after end of the room is the
floor breach-lock of the rear torpedo tube. Left and right of it stand
the two compressors, which supply the compressed air for emptying the
diving tanks.
I wrestle my way back into the control room and clamber up through
the hatch.
In line with the stern post our boat is being drawn out of the
bunker by its E-motors and emerges into a mother-of-pearl brightness that
makes the damp deck shimmer like glass. The Typhon, our signal horn,
emits a hollow groan. Once, twice. A tug replies on an even deeper note.
In the diffused foggy light I see it glide by as if it were a black
cardboard cutout. A second tug, heavy and powerful, pushes by so close I
can make out the line of automobile tires it wears as fenders, the way
Viking longboats carried their shields. A stoker sticks his ruddy face
out of a porthole and shouts something to us, but in the sudden howl of
our Typhon, I can't understand him.
The Commander himself is giving engine and rudder orders. He has
propped himself up well above the bulwark of the bridge so that he can
survey the boat from bow to stern for the difficult maneuvering through
the harbor narrows.
"Port engine stop! Starboard engine slow ahead! Rudder hard to
port!"
Cautiously the boat swings yard by yard into the mist. It's still
cold.
Our pointed bow sweeps past a row of vessels lying close together.
Small fry--harbor defense craft, a patrol boat among them.
The harbor water stinks more and more of tar and refuse and
seaweed.
Over the fog banks now, individual steamer masts begin to appear,
followed by a mass of derricks. The black filigree of the cranes reminds
me of rigs in an oil field
Workmen making their way to the wharf along a suspension bridge are
concealed up to the neck by its rusty brown side: a procession of severed
heads.
In the east above the pale gray of the cold-storage plants, a
reddish gleam gradually blends with the milky mist. A great block of
buildings slips very slowly aside. Suddenly through the framework of a
crane the sharply incised ball of the sun blazes out--only for an
instant, then over it sweeps a puff of greasy smoke from a tug towing
barges filled with black sand and coal.
I shudder in the damp wind and hold my breath, so as not to get too
much of the suffocating vapor into my lungs.
On the channel wall a crowd has assembled: harbor workmen in oilsmeared overalls, sailors, a few officers of the flotilla. I recognize
Gregor, who wasn't there last night, Kortmann, the Siamese twins Kupsch
and Stackmann. Trumann is there too, of course, looking completely
normal; no traces of last night's drunk. Behind him I notice Bechtel, he
of the depth charge on the upper deck, and Kramer, of the aircraft bomb.
Even the swaggerer Erler has turned up, surrounded by a crowd of girls
carrying flowers. But no Thomsen.
"Just let me catch sight of that goddam dumb carbolic whore," I
hear from a seaman beside me who is coiling up a stream cable.
"Boy, those bitches are crazy!" I hear from another one.
"The third from the left, the little one, I laid her!"
"Bullshit!"
"Word of honor. It's true."
To port, near the stern, a sudden surge of water. Waves of foam
dance around the boat. Buoyancy Cell One is being blown out until it is
completely filled with air. A moment later, water spurts up foaming along
the sides: one cell after the other is being blown-- our upper deck rises
higher above the water.
An artillery man from above shouts, "A ship this size!" and
stretches out his arms like a fisherman bragging about his catch; one of
our men on the upper deck sticks out his tongue. A variety of insults,
grins, funny faces. All in good humor--but that won't last.
Now it's really time to cast off. Commander, officers, and all the
crew are aboard. For Backer, the one who got it in Magdeburg, there's a
substitute: a pale, spindly eighteen-year-old.
High tide an hour ago. We should get through smoothly.
Our crew on the upper deck act out the standard farce--how
wonderful to be on our way at last! And the ones left on the pier pretend
they're dying of envy. You're off on this splendid cruise! You get to see
enemy action and grab all the medals, while we poor bastards are stuck
here in shitty France frigging around with shitty whores!
I straighten up in my still stiff leather clothes. There I stand,
hands belligerently thrust into the pockets of my felt-lined jacket-- it
reaches to my knees. I stamp up and down on the grating in my heavy boots
which are cork-soled against the icy chill of the iron.
The Old Man is grinning. "Impatient?"
The men in the military band with their steel helmets look at us
blankly.
A slovenly bassoonist in the second row is licking the mouthpiece
of his instrument for the fifth time, as though it were a lollipop.
When he has completely licked away his bassoon, one second of
eternity will have . . .
The jackbooted bandmaster raises his baton and the brasses blare
out; another second and all talk is drowned in the screeching impact of
the music.
The two gangplanks have been hauled in.
The first watch has taken up maneuver stations. The off-duty watch
remains on the upper deck. The First Watch Officer whistles to cast off.
The Commander acts as though none of this concerns him in the slightest,
and puffs away on a thick cigar. Up on the pier Trumann has also lit one.
They salute each other, cigars between index and middle fingers. The
First Watch Officer looks away in irritation.
"Where's Merkel?" the Old Man asks when the band stops playing,
gesturing toward the pier.
"Not yet cleared for sea."
"Ach, shameful!"
The Old Man squints at the sky, then wraps himself in an especially
heavy cloud of smoke, like a steam tug.
"Cast off all lines except mooring cables!"
Hawsers fore and aft are cast off by soldiers on the pier. The men
on the upper deck haul them in, working smoothly together. The result of
seven earlier patrols.
"Port engine dead slow ahead, starboard engine slow astern! Both
engines stop--midships!"
Now the mooring cable splashes into the water.
Our fenders glide along the rounded belly of the outer bunker. The
bubbling gurgle of water from the propellers makes me look toward the
stern.
The boat has freed itself from the pier, a dismal ferry on an oily
black Styx, with a cargo of leather-armored men on the antiaircraft
platform behind the circular enclosure of our bridge. No exhaust visible,
no engine noise. As though by a magnet, the boat is drawn away from the
pier.
Small bouquets of flowers fall onto the bridge. Members of the
watch stick them into the ventilation ducts.
The dark strip of water between the gray steel of the boat and the
oil-smeared wall of the pier keeps widening. Now there is a commotion in
the crowd on the pier. Someone is forcing his way through from behind,
parting the mob: Thomsen! He stretches both hands in the air, his new
decoration glittering on its neckband, and roars across the brackish
water, "Heil UA!" And again, "Heil UA!"
With an indifference uniquely his, the Old Man waves his cigar.
The boat is making its way slowly into the misty outer basin and
the horizon expands. The bow points toward the open sea.
Gradually the smoky mist lifts from the water. On the black iron
girders of a crane the sun climbs higher. Its brilliant red fills the
whole eastern sky. The edges of the clouds are dappled with red foam.
Even the seagulls catch the splendor. With folded wings they fall through
the glowing light almost to the water and at the last instant swing
upward, screeching wildly.
The clouds of mist dissipate completely and the oily water burns in
the glare. A floating crane quite close to us emits a gigantic cloud of
steam that the sun instantly stains red and orange. Beside it, even the
red BYRBH sign looks pale.
Quickly the sky becomes green-yellow and the clouds take on a dull
dove-gray.
A green wreck-buoy slides past. Looking to starboard, I see the red
roofs of the bathing huts crowded together and slowly sinking behind the
gleaming yellow derricks.
All of a sudden a high choking sound. Then comes a harsh singing
and rumbling. The deck begins to shake. The rumbling grows louder and
takes on a regular rhythm: our diesels have started.
I put my hands on the cold iron of the bridge bulwark and feel the
pulsing of the machinery.
The sea is running against us. Short, choppy waves break against
the buoyancy tanks. The head of the breakwater moves past and recedes.
A freighter slips by, camouflaged green, gray, black.
"About six thousand tons!" says the Commander. No wave at the bow;
the freighter is lying at anchor.
Our route now runs so close to the coast that we can see all the
landmarks. Soldiers wave at us.
We move at the speed of a slow cyclist.
"Clear upper deck to dive!" the Commander orders.
The bollards to which the lines had been made fast retract, the
boat hooks are lashed down, the lines and fenders stowed in spaces under
the gratings. The seamen push home and lock all the openings on the upper 
deck, bring in the flagpole, clear the machine guns, lay out the
ammunition.
Number One watches with a sharp eye to see that everything is done
properly; during silent run there must be no noise. The First Watch
Officer rechecks, then reports to the Commander, "Upper deck cleared for
diving!"
The Commander orders increased speed. Between the gratings, foam
boils up and spray strikes the tower.
The rocky coast recedes behind us. Dark shadows still lie in its
clefts. The anti-aircraft installations have been so well camouflaged
that I can hardly find them, even with binoculars.
Two patrol boats---rebuilt trawlers--join our boat to provide antiaircraft protection.
After a while a mine sweeper turns up to accompany us, a big
camouflaged ship stuffed full of barrels and other highly buoyant cargo.
Its upper deck bristles with anti-aircraft guns.
"What a job," says the navigator. "They go around on trampolines so
their bones won't be broken if a mine just happens to go off. Every day
the same thing--out--in. . . Thanks, but no thanks!"
Our boat stays precisely in the middle of the broad bubbling wake
of the mine sweeper.
I get the long bay of La Baule in my glasses: a thick row of
dollhouses. Then I turn toward the stern. Saint Nazaire is now a thin
streak, with the tall cranes no more than pins outlined against the sky.
"Complicated channel here. All sorts of wrecks lying around--
look!--tips of masts! That was an Allied transport sunk by Stukas, a bomb
straight down the funnel. It's exposed at low tide. There's another one.
The thing in front of it is a light-buoy."
When hardly anything more than the north shore of the estuary can
be seen, the navigator orders the optical bearing-finder brought up. He
places the apparatus on its stand and bends over it.
"Hey, move over!"
The guard on the starboard deck aft moves over.
"What's your landmark?" the Commander inquires.
"Tip of the church steeple there--you can hardly see it--and the
top of the rocks to starboard."
The navigator sights carefully, reads off the numbers, and calls
them down. "Last landmark," he says.
We have no harbor as destination. The goal that draws us from our
base out into the expanse of the ocean is a square designated by two
numbers on the map of the mid-Atlantic.
The Operations Division of U-boat Headquarters has divided up the
ocean into a mosaic of these small squares. This simplifies exchange of
information, but it makes it hard for me, accustomed to the usual
coordinates, to recognize our position at a glance on the map.
At eleven o'clock the escort is dismissed. The patrol boats fall
rapidly astern. The mine sweeper swings away in a wide curve and unfuris
a dark, broad-flowing smoke banner against the sky. A last wave of
farewell.
Now the navigator determinedly turns forward with his whole body,
holds the binoculars to his eyes, and props his elbows on the bulwark.
"Well, Kriechbaum, here we go again!" says the Commander and
disappears down into the conning tower.
The boat is now alone on its course.
One of the bridge guards pulls the flowers out of the ventilation
ducts and throws them overboard. They quickly drift astern in the
swirling wake.
I prop myself up high, in order to see the boat from bow to stern
over the bridge bulwark.
A long groundswell is coming toward us. Again and again the bow
dips and splits the waves like a plow. Each time, water shoots up
foaming, and sharp showers hiss across the bridge. If I run my tongue
over my lips I taste the Atlantic--salty.
In the blue vault of the sky hang a few stratocumulus clouds like
the foam of beaten egg whites. The bow descends, rises high again,
crashes down, and the whole forward deck is covered for minutes at a time
with foam. The sun brings out the colors of the spectrum in the watery
mist; little rainbows arch over the bow.
The sea is no longer bottle-green but a deep dark-blue. Thin white
streaks of foam run irregularly along the blue surface like veins of
marble. When a wad of cloud moves in front of the sun the water turns to
blue-black ink.
Astern, a broad path of milky waters; our wide, roiling wake dashes
against the groundswell and shoots up in white manes. These gleaming
tresses extend as far as the eye can see.
Propping my feet against the periscope housing I climb a little
higher out of the bridge and lean back, supporting my arms on the net
guard. Seagulls with bent swordlike wings shoot around the boat and watch
us with stony eyes.
The noise of the diesels alters constantly; it ebbs away when the
exhaust vents on either side of the boat are submerged in the sea, then
rises when they come free and the gas can escape unhindered.
The Commander returns to the deck, narrows his eyes, and raises his
binoculars.
Ahead, a cloud like a gray fleece hangs over the water. The
Commander eyes it sharply. He compensates so precisely with his knees for
the motion of the boat that he has no need of a handhold.
"High time we put to sea again!"
The Commander increases speed and orders a zigzag course. At each
change of direction the boat heels to one side. The wake twists to right,
then left.
"Look out for bubble tracks--this area--very risky!" and then
turning to me: "The gentlemen of the other firm are accustomed to lie in
wait for us here. After all, they know exactly when we cast off. Not much
of a trick--they can easily find out. From the harbor workers, from the
cleaning women--from the whores. What's more, they can peek in themselves
while we're docked."
Again and again the Commander glances distrustfully toward the sky.
Washboard wrinkles in his forehead, his nose twisted to one side, he
shifts impatiently from one foot to the other. "Any minute now the flyers
could surprise us. They're getting bolder all the time!"
The clouds gradually draw closer together. Only now and then does a
piece of blue sky shine through.
"Very risky indeed," the Old Man repeats, and murmurs under his
binoculars, "Better get below just now. When there's an alarm-- as few
people on deck as possible."
That means me. I disappear promptly from the bridge.
My bunk is in the petty officers' quarters, the U-room, the most
uncomfortable on board: it has the most through traffic. Anyone who wants
to get to the galley, or to the diesels or the E-motors, has to come
through here. At every change of watch the men from the engine room
squeeze through from astern, and the new watch comes through from the
control room. That means six men each time. And the stewards have to work
their way past with their full dishes and pots. In fact, the whole place
is nothing more than a narrow corridor with four bunks on the right and
four on the left. In the middle of the passage, screwed to the floor,
there's a table with folding leaves. The space on both sides is so narrow
that at mealtimes the men have to sit on the lower bunks with their heads
bent. There is far too little space for stools. And there is muss and
confusion whenever someone has to get from the engines to the control
room or vice versa during a meal.
Meals are so arranged that the officers and the crew are already
finished in the forward compartments when the petty officers crowd around
their own table--so the stewards don't then have to go back and forth
between the bow compartment and the galley. Nevertheless there is
constant disturbance. It's my good luck that I don't have to eat in the
U-room; a place is laid for me in the Officers' Mess.
Some of the bunks are used by two petty officers in rotation. I am
the happy possessor of a bunk all to myself.
The petty officers from the off-duty watch are still busy arranging
their lockers. Two men going to the engine room have to get through to
the stern, and there's a mix-up right away. My bunker rail, a kind of
narrow aluminum ladder, has come down, which adds to the confusion.
My bunk is still covered with canned food, a bundle of fur-lined
jerkins, and some loaves of bread. A seaman brings oilskins, leather
clothing, seaboots, and rescue gear. The lined leather jacket is still
uncreased. The boots are lined with felt, but are big enough to wear over
heavy socks.
The rescue gear is in a dark-brown sailcloth bag with a zipper.
Brand new. "Pure decoration," says the control-room mate, "really meant
for the Baltic!"
"But very useful when the diesel stinks," says a big dark-haired
fellow with bushy eyebrows: Frenssen, the diesel mechanic mate.
Nevertheless, the rescue gear has its use; if I turn the nozzle slightly,
the little steel flask immediately emits oxygen.
I stow the brown bag at the foot of my bunk. For my possessions I
have a tiny locker, not even big enough to hold the absolute necessities.
So I put my writing materials and camera in the bunk between the light
mattress and the wall. Just enough space remains for my body--it's like
being in a suitcase. I want to look around a little before the noon meal
and I go forward through the control room.
Aside from the petty officers, the rest of the crew, including the
Commander and officers, sleep in the foreship. The Commander lives
directly beyond the control-room hatch. Behind a green curtain there's a
bunk, a couple of lockers on the wall and ceiling, and a very small 
writing table, really only a writing board--and that's it. He too has to
make out as best he can. Closed rooms on either side of the passageway,
such as you find in surface vessels, don't exist. Opposite the
Commander's "room" are the radio shack and the sound room.
Farther forward is the Officers' Mess--the wardroom, which also
serves as living quarters for the Chief, the apprentice engineer (our
Second Engineer), and the First and Second Watch Officers.
The mattress on which our Commander and the Chief sit at mealtimes
is really the Chief's bunk. The railroad berth above it is folded up
during the day; it's the Second Watch Officer's berth. The berths of the
First Watch Officer and the Second Engineer are more favorably placed on
the opposite wall. Since these don't have to be put away during the day,
the First Watch Officer and the Second Engineer can stretch out during
their free time.
The table, screwed fast to the floor, is on the side away from the
passage. It's designed for four: the Commander, the Chief, and the two
Watch Officers. However, six of us will be eating there.
In the adjoining compartment, the Quarters, which is separated from
the 0-Mess simply by lockers, live the navigator Kriechbaum, the two
chief mechanics Johann and Franz, and the bosun Behrmann. Under the floor
plates lies Battery One, which together with Battery Two under the U-room
supplies the energy for running underwater.
The bow compartment is separated from the Quarters by a
nonpressure-resistant hatch. Despite its cavelike appearance, the bow
compartment is the closest thing we have to a room. Strictly speaking, it
is a combination work-storage space for torpedoes and a battle station.
"Torpedo room" is therefore an accurate designation. Here live most of
the crew. On each side are six berths, two by two, one above the other.
In them the sailors, or "lords," sleep, plus the torpedo men, the
radioman, and the stokers.
Because they stand six-hour watches, two stokers share each bunk.
For the others who go on watch in trios, there are two bunks for every
three men. No one has a bunk to himself. When a sailor gets up to begin
his watch, the man he relieves lies down in the stale air he's left
behind. Nevertheless, there still aren't enough bunks; four hammocks
dangle from the ceiling.
The men off-duty rarely stay undisturbed. During mealtimes they all
have to get up. The upper berths have to be snapped shut and the lower
ones cleared so that the "lords" can sit down on them. When the torpedoes
in the four bow tubes are being "adjusted," the room is transformed into
a machine shop. Then the bunks are taken down and the hammocks stowed
away.
The reserve torpedoes for the forward tubes are stowed under the
raised floor plates. Until they are loaded, the lack of space will be
painful. So for the men in the bow compartment, every torpedo fired means
added freedom of motion. But they do have at least one advantage: no
through traffic.
Right now the place looks like a devastated arsenal: leather
clothing, rescue gear, sweaters, sacks of potatoes, teapots, uncoiled
rope, loaves of bread.. . Unimaginable that all this will disappear to
make room for twenty-six seamen and the torpedo mechanic, who is the only
petty officer not living in the U-room.
It looks as if everything they couldn't find space for right away
has been shoved in here. Just as I appear, the bosun is urging two seamen 
on. "Hurry up--the lettuce crate between the torpedo tubes! Lettuce!
You'd think this was a fucking grocery store!"
The bosun points out the narrowness of the ship as if it is a
special attraction. He acts as though it were all his own idea. "It's a
matter of give and take," he says. "The heads, for example: there are two
of them, but we have to use one for provisions, so there's more space for
food and less for shitting! You try to make sense out of it!"
In all the compartments, thick bundles of cables and pipes run
under the floors. If you open a locker door, more of them are revealed--
as if the woodwork were only a pretty veneer over the technological maze.
At lunch I have to sit on a folding chair in the gangway next to
the Second Watch Officer. The Commander and the Chief are on the "leather
sofa," the Chief's bunk. The apprentice engineer and the First Watch
Officer sit at the ends of the table.
If someone wants to get through, the Second Watch Officer and I
either have to get up or jam our stomachs against the table and bend over
so that the man can wriggle past. Standing up is the lesser evil, as we
quickly discover.
The Commander wears a disreputable sweater of indefinable color. He
has changed his blue-gray shirt for a red-checked one, its collar showing
over his sweater. While the steward is serving, he sits with folded arms,
leaning back in his corner and occasionally inspecting the ceiling as
though fascinated by the veins in the wood.
The apprentice engineer is a full lieutenant, new on board. He's to
replace the Chief after this patrol. A blond North German with a broad,
rather square-cut face. While we eat, I see little of him except his
profile. He looks to neither right nor left and doesn't utter a sound.
The Chief sits opposite me. When you see him next to the Commander
he looks even thinner and more haggard than he really is: a sharp, curved
nose that shows the bone, black hair combed back flat. His receding
hairline gives him a real thinker's forehead. Very dark eyes. Prominent
cheekbones and temples. Full lips but a firm chin. The men call him
"Rasputin," mainly because he goes on tending his pointed black beard
with devotion and patience long after every patrol, until finally making
up his mind to shave it off and rinse it away with the lather.
He's been on board since the boat's first patrol and is the second
most important man here, the undisputed ruler of all technical matters.
His domain is completely separate from that of the sea officers; his
fighting station is the control room.
"The Chief's first-rate," says the Old Man. "He keeps a steady
course and that's what counts. Does it by feel. The new man will never be
able to. He simply doesn't have it in his fingertips. You can't do it
just by knowing things. You have to sense the reaction of the boat and
act before a particular tendency can take effect. A matter of experience
and feeling! Not everyone can do it. Not something that can be learned. .
."
As he sits there beside the Old Man, with his small lively hands,
his dreamy eyes, his long, dark hair, I can imagine him in all kinds of
roles: a croupier or a crap-shooter, a violinist or a movie actor. His
build is almost that of a dancer. Instead of boots he wears light sport
shoes, instead of the cumbersome U-boat clothing a kind of overalls, like
a gym outfit. Getting through the circular hatches is easier for him than 
for anyone else. "He slips through the boat like oil," I heard the
control-room mate remark this morning.
From the Old Man I know that the Chief is unflappable, for all his
racehorse nervousness. While we were in harbor he was seldom at the
flotilla mess. He was on board from morning till night busying himself
with the smallest details.
"On this boat not so much as a wooden screw goes in without the
Chief's supervision. He has no confidence in shipyard workmen."
On account of his small stature, the Second Watch Officer is known
to the crew as "the Garden Gnome" or "the Baby Officer." I have known him
and the Old Man and the Chief for quite a while. The Second Watch Officer
is just as conscientious as the Chief. He always looks alert--almost sly.
If you speak to him, his face soon crinkles into laughter. "He stands
firm on his hind legs on deck," says the Old Man. The skipper sleeps
soundly when the Second Watch Officer is on duty.
The First Watch Officer has been out on patrol only once before. I
hardly ever saw him in the mess during our time in port. Toward both him
and the Second Engineer, the Commander's manner is strained--either
noticeably reserved or exaggeratedly friendly.
In contrast to the Second Watch Officer, the First Watch Officer is
a gangling, pale, colorless type with a frozen sheepface. No real selfpossession or assurance, so he's always trying to appear quick and
decisive. I soon discover that he obeys orders but has no initiative or
common sense. The upper portions of his ears are strangely undeveloped
and the lobes lie close to his head. His nostrils are flat. His whole
face looks unfinished. Also he has an unattractive way of glancing
disapprovingly out of the corner of his eye, without moving his head,
When the Old Man produces one of his little jokes, he smiles sourly.
If we have to put to sea with nothing but schoolboys and
superannuated Hitler Youths, things must be getting pretty bad," the Old
M an had murmured to himself in the Bar Royal, no doubt with the First
Watch Officer in mind.
"Cups over here!" the Commander now directs, and pours tea for all
of us, There's no longer room for the hot teapot on the table. I have to
hold it between my knees and bend over it to get at my food. Damn hot! I
can barely stand it.
The Commander sips with visible enjoyment. He forces himself
farther and farther into the corner and draws up one knee so that he can
brace it against the table. Then with a slight nod he looks around at us,
exactly like a contented father with his brood.
His eyes sparkle with mischief. His mouth widens: the Second Watch
Officer has to get up again. I of course have to get up too, along with
the teapot, because Cookie wants to go forward through the passage.
The cook is a vigorous, shortish fellow with a neck as wide as his
head. He grins at me trustingly, from ear to ear. I suspect that he's
come through the mess right now to be congratulated on his food.
"I'll tell you a story about him sometime!" the Old Man says,
chewing, as the cook departs.
Crackling in the loudspeaker. A voice comes on. "First watch
prepare for duty!"
The First Watch Officer gets up and begins systematically to dress
himself up. The Old Man watches with interest as he finally manages to
get into the huge boots with their thick cork soles, wrap a scarf 
meticulously around his neck, and muffle himself up in the thick-lined
leather jacket; he gives a military salute and departs.
Shortly afterward, the navigator, who has been in charge of the
previous watch, comes through, his face reddened by the wind, and
reports: "Wind northwest, tending to veer to the right, visibility good,
barometer one thousand and three."
Then he makes us get up because he wants to go through to his
quarters to change. The navigator has also been on board since the boat
was commissioned. He has never served on surface vessels, only on Uboats. Way back in the old Reich Navy in those tiny, single-hulled
crafts.
The navigator would probably be a failure as an actor. His facial
muscles are stiff, so that he seems to be wearing a rigid mask. Only his
deep-hollowed, heavy-browed eyes are full of life. "He has eyes in the
back of his head," I heard someone in the bow compartment say of him
approvingly.
In so low a voice that the navigator can't pick it up next door,
the Old Man whispers to me: "He's an ace at dead reckoning. Sometimes in
bad weather we can't see stars or sun for days or weeks at a time, but
our position checks with astonishing precision. I often wonder how he
does it. Has a lot to do on board. In charge of the third watch in
addition to all that navigational stuff."
After the navigator, it's the bosun who wants to go forward.
Behrmann is a chunky fellow, red-cheeked and bursting with health. And
then, as though to illustrate the contrast between seamen and engineers,
comes the white-faced chief mechanic Johann. "The Sorrows of Christ," the
Commander calls him. "A real expert. Married to his machines. Hardly ever
comes on deck, a real mole."
Five minutes later three men of the new watch struggle through the
mess toward the stern.
It no longer matters to me--when the First Watch Officer got up I
had quickly planted myself in his seat.
"The next to last was Ario," the Chief says. "And the last one, the
little fellow, was the new--what's his name?--the replacement for Backer.
Control-room assistant. He's already got a nickname, 'the Bible Scholar'-
-apparently he reads tracts."
Soon the watch that has been relieved comes through. The Chief
leans back and drawls, "That's Bachmann, 'the Gigolo': diesel stoker.
Absolute balls! There's nothing to stoke any more, but in the Navy
traditions survive longer than ships. Hagen: E-motor stoker. Even less to
stoke. Turbo: the other control-room assistant. First-rate boy."
Then from the opposite direction appears a tall blond fellow,
Hacker, the torpedo mechanic and senior man in the bow compartment. The
only petty officer who sleeps there. "Maniac," says the Old Man. "Once he
got a completely screwed-up torpedo out of the upper-deck compartment
with a huge sea running, took it apart and repaired it, below decks of
course. That was our last fish, and we knocked out one more ship with it,
a ten-thousand-ton steamer. _His_ steamer, strictly speaking. He'll get
the fried egg soon--he's earned it."
Next through the compartment is a small man with very black hair
carefully plastered back and slit eyes that twinkle confidingly at the
Chief, His forearms are tattooed; I catch a fleeting glimpse of a sailor
hugging a girl against a red sun.
"That was Dunlop. Torpedo man. He looks after the workshop. The big
harmonica in the sound room belongs to him."
Finally we get Franz, also a master mechanic. The Chief casts a
disgruntled look after him. "Tires too easily. Johann, the other one, is
the better man."
The meal is over and I'm making my way from the O-Mess to the petty
officers' quarters.
The bosun must be a terrific housekeeper. He's divided up the
provisions and stowed them away so perfectly everywhere that the trim of
the ship hasn't suffered--and, as he proudly assures me, in such a way
that perishables will come to hand before things that last. No one else
knows where the mountains of food have disappeared to. Only the hard
sausages, the sides of bacon, and the loaves are visible. The supply of
sausage hangs from the ceiling of the control room as though in a
smokehouse. The fresh bread fills the hammocks in front of the sound room
and radio shack. Every time someone wants to get past, he has to stoop
and work his way through the loaves.
I climb through the second circular hatch. My bunk is free now. The
equipment is laid out properly on the blanket, the bag with my belongings
at the bottom end. I can pull the green curtain shut and close out the
world. Wood paneling on one side, green curtain on the other, white
lacquer above. The life of the boat is now reduced to voices and sounds.
In the afternoon I go up onto the bridge. The Second Watch Officer
has just begun watch. The sea is bottle-green. Close beside the boat,
almost black. The air is damp, the sky completely clouded over.
After I have stood for a good while beside the Second Watch Officer
he begins to talk from beneath his binoculars. "It was about here that
they fired a spread of four at us. Patrol before last. We saw one fish
shoot by the stern and another one cut past the bow. Made quite an
impression!"
Choppy little waves have risen on the low groundswell. However
benign the water may appear, the shadow of each of these short waves may
hide the enemy's periscope eye.
"Have to be damn careful around here!" says the Second Watch
Officer from between his leather gloves.
The Commander comes up. He growls a curse at the weather and says,
"Look out, youngster, keep your eyes open! Damn bad spot here!"
Suddenly he snarls at the starboard lookout aft. "Keep it down or
we'll have to hang you over a laundry line!" And after a while, "If you
can't take it, you shouldn't be here. But since you are, you'll have to
find your sea legs any way you can."
He orders a practice dive for 16.30 hours, After her long period in
dock, the boat is to submerge for the first time and be balanced out, so
that when an alarm comes there won't have to be a lot of trimming and
flooding first. It's also important to make sure all the vents and plugs
are working.
The order "Clear bridge for dive!" initiates the maneuver. The
anti-aircraft ammunition disappears into the tower. The three lookouts
and the Officer of the Watch are still on the bridge.
Orders, reports, ringing of bells. Aft, the diesels are stopped and
disengaged. The E-motors are geared to the drive shafts and set at high
speed. Simultaneous with the stopping of the diesels, the big conduits
leading to the outside--for the exhaust and for air intake--are closed.
From the diesel room the signal _Ready to Dive_ is flashed to the control
room. The bow compartment also gives its _All Ready_ signal. The lookouts
on the bridge have come below. Looking up the shaft of the tower, I see
the Watch Officer hastily turning the hand wheel that presses the tower
hatch home in its bed.
"Clear the air-release vents!" the Chief orders. Reports come in
quick succession to the Chief. "One!" "Three, both sides!" "Five!" "Five
clear!"
It sounds like a magic incantation.
"All vents clear!" the Chief reports.
"Flood!" comes from below.
"Flood!" the Chief repeats for his crew.
The sailors in the control room swiftly open the emergency
evacuation vents. The air that gave the boat buoyancy escapes with a
thundering roar from its tanks. The hydroplane operators set the forward
plane hard down and the after-plane ten down. The boat dips and becomes
noticeably bow heavy; the pointer on the depth manometer moves slowly
over the numbers on the dial. One more wave crashes against the tower and
then suddenly all noise ceases: the bridge has slid underwater.
Oppressive silence--no breaking of waves, no more vibration of the
diesels. The radio is silent. Radio waves cannot penetrate the depths.
Even the humming of the ventilators has stopped.
I pay close attention. Someday it may be up to me.
The Chief orders, "Forward up ten, aft up fifteen!" The bow
heaviness is corrected. The current from the propellers strikes the
upward-tilted hydroplane and slowly the boat grows stern heavy. The final
bubbles of air that have clung to the corners of the buoyancy cells and
might give unwelcome lift now escape.
The Chief reports to the Commander, "Boat balanced!"
The Commander orders, "Close vents!"
The exhaust vents on top of the buoyancy cells are closed by hand
wheels and connecting rods in the control room.
"Proceed to ninety feet!" The Commander is leaning motionless at
the chart table, his elbows braced behind him.
The Chief stands behind the two hydroplane operators, so that the
hydroplane indicators, depth indicators, trim indicators, waterdepth
gauges, scales, and manometer needle are in full view.
The hand of the manometer turns. Forty feet, sixty, seventy-five.
Now there is only the soft humming of the E-motors. Somewhere water
drips into the bilge with a thin, lost sound. The Chief looks up. With
his pocket flashlight he goes searching among the pipes on the port side.
Then the dripping stops by itself. "That's that," the Chief murmurs.
A shudder like a chill runs through the boat.
The Old Man seems completely unconcerned. He appears to be just
staring blankly ahead, but now and again he glances around quickly.
The indicator on the manometer approaches ninety. Its movement
becomes steadily slower. Finally it stops. The boat is no longer
descending; it hovers in the water like a zeppelin, but you can feel that
it is still stern heavy. There is no upward or downward motion, but it's
not yet on an even keel.
The Chief begins the trimming operation. "Pump water forward!" The
control-room assistant Turbo turns a valve behind the periscope shaft.
The Chief orders a readjustment of the hydroplanes. Now the boat
rises, without any water having been expelled. Very slowly the hand of
the manometer moves backward over the dial. Simply by use of the
hydroplanes and the forward thrust of the propellers the required depth
is reached--dynamically.
Now and again the Chief gives an order to the hydroplane operators.
Finally the Commander speaks. "Proceed to periscope depth!" He gets up
with a jerk and clambers heavily into the tower.
"Forward up twenty, aft down five!" The Chief.
The column of water in the Papenberg is already slowly sinking. The
Chief bends to one side, tilts his head back, and reports to the tower,
"Periscope cleared!"
Every up or down movement of the column of water in the Papenberg
means a rise or fall of the boat. The hydroplane operators have to try
through expertly timed setting of the planes to counteract a rise or fall
before these motions show in the Papenberg, for then it is too late:
either the periscope has risen too high out of the water, betraying the
boat to the enemy in case of attack, or it has plunged beneath the
surface so that the Commander sees nothing at all at the decisive moment.
The Chief has not once taken his eyes off the Papenberg. Neither
have the two hydroplane operators. It barely rises or falls. Total
silence in the boat, only an occasional low humming from the periscope
motor.
"Bridge watch stand by! Oilskins on!" The voice of the Commander
from the tower.
The bridge lookouts tie their sou'-westers under their chins and
put on their oilskin jackets, then form in a group under the tower hatch.
"Prepare to surface!"
Aft, the stokers now pump oil so that the diesels can start
immediately.
"Surface!"
The Chief has the forward hydroplane turned up full and the aft up
five degrees. He orders the tanks blown.
With a sharp hissing sound the compressed air streams in.
"Equalize pressure!"
Suddenly there is a pain in my ears; the excess pressure has been
reduced. A stream of fresh air bursts into the boat from above: the tower
hatch is open. The ventilators are turned on and draw a mighty draft into
the boat.
There follows a series of orders for the engines.
"Port diesel ready!"
"Port E-motor stop! Change gears!"
"Port engine slow forward!"
The trim cells are flooded again. After that the Commander orders,
"Blow tanks with the diesels!"
The diesel exhaust gases now force the water out of the buoyancy
cells. This saves compressed air. And the procedure has another
advantage: the oily exhaust gases help prevent corrosion.
One buoyancy cell after the other is blown out. From the bridge the
Commander can tell by the air bubbles that rise along the sides of the
boat whether the buoyancy cells have been properly cleared. After a while
he calls down, "All blown. Dismiss from diving stations!"
The boat is a surface vessel again.
The Commander orders, "Starboard diesel stand by! Starboard E-motor
stop! Shift over! Starboard engine forward slow!"
The Chief stands up, wriggles his shoulders, stretches, and looks
quizzically at me. "Well?"
I nod submissively and, like a defeated boxer, sink down on the
sack of potatoes leaning against the chart table. The Chief seizes a
handful of prunes from the chest that stands open for everyone beside the
table, and holds them out to me. "Spiritual refreshment! Yes, we're not
exactly your simple, straightforward kind of boat."
When the Old Man has disappeared, the Chief says quietly, "Things
are going to stay lively today. 'Working the weariness out of dissipated
bones!' is what the Old Man calls it. Nothing gets past him. He has his
eye on everyone. All we need is a single mistake and we'll be in for one
exercise after the other."
On its table under a thick celluloid cover lies the sea chart. At
present it's still a blank, showing only the edges of the coasts. The
land masses behind the coasts are empty, as though uninhabited; no roads,
no towns. A sea chart. What's behind the coasts has no meaning for the
seafarer. At most a few landmarks and the designated lighthouses. On the
other hand, all shoals and sandbars near the entrance to rivers are here.
A zigzag pencil line extends from Saint Nazaire. There is a cross on it--
our last bearing.
Our general course is three hundred degrees, but I keep hearing
orders to the helmsman. Danger from enemy submarines still keeps us from
steering a straight course.
In the control room an off-duty member of the watch is talking with
Turbo, the assistant, who preserved his reddish beard while the boat was
in harbor and now looks like an imitation Viking. "Wonder where we're off
to this time."
"Looks like Iceland!"
"Naw, I bet on the south! A long southern patrol. Look at all the
stuff we took on board."
"That doesn't mean a damn thing. And why should we care anyway?
There's no getting ashore for a quick lay whichever way we go."
Turbo has been aboard a long time. With the blasé manner of a man
of experience, he draws down the corners of his mouth, half hidden under
his tangle of beard, taps the other man indulgently on the shoulder, and
explains to him, "Cape Hatteras in the moonlight--Iceland in the fog--you
certainly see the world when you're in the Navy."
Before the evening meal the Commander orders a trial deep dive.
He wants to find out whether the outboard plugs will hold at
greater depths.
The VII-C boats have been approved for a depth of three hundred
feet. But because the effect of depth charges decreases the deeper they
are when they explode (the denser water reduces the impact of the
pressure wave), the boats must often go below three hundred to escape
pursuit. To what depth the pressure hull can really hold out--i.e., what
the maximum diving depth is--who knows? Men who have gone very deep can 
never be sure they've actually reached the extreme limit. And a crew only
finds out once at what depth its boat cracks.
The afternoon's series of diving commands is repeated. But we don't
reach equilibrium at ninety; instead we go deeper and deeper. The boat is
as quiet as a mouse.
Suddenly a sharp screeching, a frightening, ear-splitting sound. I
catch alarmed looks, but the Old Man makes no move to stop the oblique
downward motion.
The manometer needle stands at five hundred. Again the shrieking,
combined with dull, scraping sounds.
"Not exactly an ideal spot here," murmurs the Chief. He has sucked
in his cheeks and glances expressively at the Commander.
"The boat has to be able to take it," says the Old Man laconically.
Then I realize the boat is scraping over rocks on the bottom.
"Purely a matter of nerves," whispers the Chief.
The ghastly sound continues.
"The pressure hull will hold up all right . . . But the screws and
rudder . . ." the Chief complains in a mutter. The Old Man seems to be
deaf.
Thank god--the screeching and scraping stop. The Chief's face is
gray.
"Sounded exactly like a streetcar on a curve," says the Second
Watch Officer. The Old Man's manner is that of a benevolent pastor as he
explains to me, "In the water noises are magnified five times. Makes a
great racket, but doesn't mean much."
The Chief gulps in air as if he'd just been saved from drowning.
The Old Man looks at him like an interested psychiatrist, then announces,
"That's enough for today. Surface!"
The litany of orders for the surfacing maneuver is run through. The
hand of the depth manometer moves backward over the dial.
The Commander and the watcti go above. I follow them and take up a
position behind the bridge enclosure in the "greenhouse." There is plenty
of space around the four anti-aircraft guns. I can look straight through
and down between the crossbars of the greenhouse railing. Although we're
traveling at cruising speed, the water foams and swirls violently.
Myriads of white bubbles stream up, strips of foam interweave only to
disperse again. I feel entirely alone. Isolated on an iron raft. The wind
presses against me, the iron vibrates with minute oscillations. New
patterns drift by constantly. I have to tear my eyes away to keep from
dozing off.
Suddenly behind my back I hear the deep drawling voice of the Old
Man. "Beautiful, isn't it?"
Then follows his usual bear dance. "Stretching his legs," he calls
it.
I squint at the sinking sun, which has broken through a hole in the
clouds.
"A pleasure cruise in the middle of the war! What more could a man
ask!"
He stares at the foreship and says, "The most seaworthy ship there
is--with the greatest radius of action."
Then we both look astern over the waves.
"Tsch--our wake! A pretty illustration of mortality: you're still
watching--and it's gone!"
I don't dare look at him. "Philosophical hot air," is what he would
call this kind of profundity if he heard it from anyone else. But he goes
on to spin the thread further. "Even Mother Earth is a little more
considerate; at least she allows us the illusion."
I press my tongue against my front teeth and hiss softly.
But the Old Man won't be put off. "Perfectly clear. She allows us
the illusion that we've immortalized ourselves on her--engraved records,
erected monuments. All she's doing is giving herself a little more time
than the sea does to level things out again. A couple of thousand years
if necessary.
"The Navy's famous clarity strikes again!" is all I can find to
say, embarrassed.
"That's the way it is," says the Old Man, grinning straight into my
face.
My first night aboard: I try to go limp, to extinguish all thought.
Waves of sleep finally reach me, draw me away for a while, but before I
can settle down properly they reject me again. Am I asleep or awake? The
heat. The stench of oil. The whole boat quivers with a thin vibration:
the engines communicate their rhythm to the smallest rivet.
The diesels run all night. Every change of watch startles me wide
awake. Each time the hatch opens or is slammed shut in its frame, I'm
dragged back from the verge of unconsciousness.
It's very different from awakening on a conventional ship. Instead
of the ocean foaming beyond a porthole, there is only harsh electric
light.
Heavy-headed, lead in my skull from the engine fumes. For half an
hour now deafening radio music has been rasping at my nerves.
Beneath me I see two bent backs, but no place to put my dangling
foot. If I were to get out of my bunk now, I would have to step between
the half-finished food and the scraps of white bread turning to mush in
puddles of coffee. The whole table is a slimy mess. The sight of paleyellow scrambled eggs makes my gorge rise.
From the engine room comes the stench of lubricating oil.
"Dammit, man, get that hatch shut!"
Hinrich, the radioman, looks despairingly at the ceiling. When he
discovers me, he stares, his eyes still gummed half shut, as though I
were an apparition.
"Give us another shot of that coffee from the clap hypo," says the
E-mate Pilgrim.
Clearly I should have got out of my bunk earlier. I can't trample
through their breakfast now, so I let myself sink back and listen. "Come
on, get your fat ass out of there!"
"Like baby shit, these scrambled eggs! I can't stand the smell of
this powdered stuff!"
"Want to keep hens in the control room?"
The thought of chickens--white leghorns--in the control room
nesting on the trim-valve controls cheers me up. I conjure up a vivid
picture of their greenish-white muck smeared on the floor plates amid
clotted chicken feathers, and I can hear their silly cackhng in my ears.
As a child I hated to touch chickens. I can't stand them now either. The 
smell of boiled chicken feathers--the pale yellow skin--the fatty pope's
nose .
The loudspeaker thunders through the boat, "I am Lilli, your Lilli
from Najanka. That's in the Cameroon, right on the Tanka. . ."
The loudspeaker can be turned down a little, but it can't be turned
off since it's also used to transmit commands. So we have to acquiesce to
the whims of the radioman or his assistant, who selects the records in
his shack. "Lilh" seems to have caught the assistant's fancy. He's
playing it for the second time this morning.
I shudder at the realization that it's _really_ only between four
and five am. But to avoid the process of conversion in radio
communications, we operate on German summer time. Besides, we are now so
far west of the prime meridian that between the sun time of our position
and the time shown by our clocks there must be more than another hour's
difference. Essentially it doesn't matter when we set the beginning of
the day. The electric light is on twenty-four hours, and the changing of
the watches occurs at intervals that have nothing to do with the time of
day.
It's time to drag myseff out of the covers. I say "Excuse me," and
force one foot between the two men who are squatting on the bunk below.
"All good things come from above!" I hear Pilgrim say.
While I search for my shoes, which I thought I had safely jammed
behind two pipes, I carry on a morning chat with the control-room mate,
who is sitting close beside me on a folding chair.
"Well, how does it look?"
"_Comme ci, comme ça_, Herr Leutnant!"
"Barometer?"
"Rising."
I thoughtfully scratch the fluff from the wool blankets out of the
stubble on my face. The comb I run over my head turns black immediately--
my hair catches the particles in the oil fumes like a filter.
From my locker I dig out a washcloth and soap. I would like to wash
in the forward head, but a quick glance through the circular hatch tells
me that's impossible at the moment: the red light is on. So I simply wipe
my eyes and stow the washcloth and soap in my trouser pocket for the time
being.
The light signal was rigged up by the Chief. It goes on as soon as
the latch on the inside is turned to "Occupied." One of the nice
inventions that reduce wear and tear, for now no one needs to work his
way in uncertainty along the narrow gangway from one end of the boat to
the other, only to be brought up short in front of a locked door.
As I leave the wardroom I hear Pilgrim croon, "The morning shit
comes soon or late, although till evening you may wait," and immediately
there is a rumbling in my belly. I apply the Coué method: "There is no
rumbling in my belly. In my belly there is peace. In my belly there is
quiet and serenity!"
The Chief comes in from his morning visit to the engine room, his
hands oily. The First Watch Officer is nowhere to be seen, nor is the
Second Engineer. The Commander is probably washing. The Second Watch
Officer is still on duty.
The cook had been wakened at o6.oo. Along with the pale scrambled
eggs that come to the table cold, there is bread, butter, and black
coffee called "nigger sweat." Against this brew my stomach protests 
violently; the cramping and rumbling in my gut get worse. I take a quick
look to see whether Cabin H is finally free.
"Don't you like it?" the Chief inquires.
"I don't know--it isn't exactly a taste thrill."
"You ought to try brushing your teeth first, then perhaps it'll
taste better," the Chief advises, chewing with both cheeks stuffed. The
Commander comes out of his cubbyhole with toothpaste spattered on his
cheek and his beard darkened with moisture. He says, "Good morning to
you, unwashed heroes of the sea," edges himself into his corner, and
stares into space.
No one dares say a word.
Finally he asks for the code word of the day.
"_Procul negotiis_," the Chief proposes and translates immediately,
so as not to show anyone up, "Far from business cares."
The Commander nods. "Education, education--excellent!"
The loudspeaker blares a torch song.
Now the heavy morning traffic has started up. Every few minutes
someone forces his way through the Officers' Mess. Since I sit on my
folding chair in the middle of the gangway I have to get up each time. My
guts are now in upheaval. Dammit! When will the idiot in there finally
come out?
The whole thing would be no problem if demand for the head were
evenly spaced. If there were no rush hour like this morning. Midnight is
just as bad, because the watch from the bridge and the watch from the
engine room go off duty simultaneously. Eight people then want to use it
at the same time. Last night, two of the men still waiting in the control
room were doubled up as though they'd been kicked in the belly.
At last the door to Cabin H opens. The First Watch Officer! I
snatch my things and almost tear the door out of his hand. Over the tiny
wash basin in Cabin H there is even a faucet for fresh water. It isn't
running, but in any case it's only to be used for brushing teeth and a
cat's lick with a washcloth. I can use the salt-water tap and manage to
achieve a sort of half lather with the salt-water soap provided, but I
can't make myself gargle with the briny water. When I turn up again in
the Officer's Mess everyone is still sitting around the table in silence,
following the Commander's example.
From the loudspeaker a melting voice inquires, "Do you love me? It
was only yesterday that you said no . . ."
The Chief sighs audibly and rolls his eyes.
I take a large swallow of coffee and swirl it back and forth until
it's foaming, force the brown liquid through the narrow openings between
my teeth, let it gurgle through a gap, and shoot it from my right cheek
into the left until all the encrusted spittle and deposits are washed
away--then I swallow. Ah! Now I can breathe better through my mouth. Next
a deep breath through my nose. My throat and respiratory tract are clear.
The coffee tastes better too. The Chief was right.
After breakfast the Commander goes to work on the ship's log with
undisguised reluctance. He announces special instruction for the petty
officers an hour later. The Chief disappears aft again, the First Watch
Officer busies himself with some kind of paper work.
The steward comes to clear away: ship's routine.
On my way aft I pass through the control room, and the round
opening of the tower hatch is still filled with black night. The air
coming in from above is cold and damp. Let's go, I say to myself, and put 
my left foot on the aluminum ladder, although I don't feel the slightest
desire to go on deck. Now the right leg!
I'm at the level of the helmsman, who is sitting bent over his
dimly lit dials in the tower.
"Permission to come onto the bridge?"
"Cranted!" The voice of the Second Watch Officer.
I push my head over the rim and politely say good morning.
It takes a while for my eyes to adjust themselves to the darkness
so that I can make out the horizon. High in the sky a few pale stars
still shimmer faintly. Above the eastern horizon a red band of light is
slowly emerging. Gradually the water brightens too.
I shiver.
Kriechbaum the navigator comes up. Silently he looks around, sniffs
hard, and has the sextant handed up to him.
"Stopwatch ready?" he shouts down in a hoarse voice.
"Aye aye, sir!" comes the report from far below.
The navigator points his instruments at Saturn and puts his right
eye to the eyepiece. For a while he remains motionless, then he lowers
the sextant and turns the screw: he brings Saturn from the heavens and
places it precisely on the horizon.
"Attention--Saturn--zero!" he shouts below.
In the control room the time is recorded. The navigator has
difficulty reading the figures in the half-light. "Twenty-two degrees,
thirty-five minutes," he announces to the man below.
From the time of day and the height of the planet a base line can
now be calculated. _One_ base line, however, does not give a ship's
position--we need a second.
The navigator raises the sextant once more.
"Attention--Jupiter--zero!"
A pause, and then: "Twenty-two degrees, twenty-seven minutes!"
Cautiously he hands the sextant down, then follows it. I climb
after him. Once below, he takes off his peajacket and pulls up to the
chart table. He has no spacious map room such as navigation officers have
on the big steamers. He has to make do with the tiny table in the control
room, placed to port amid a confusion of switches, speaking tubes, and
valves. Above this table is a locker for the sextant and the starfinder
and a shelf with nautical almanacs and tables of times and azimuths,
navigational handbooks, catalogues of lighthouses, charts of the weather
and tides.
The navigator picks up a pencil and calculates. He is on intimate
terms with sines, cosines, tangents, and their logarithms.
"It's sort of nice that we're still making use of the stars," I say
casually, just to put an end to the silence.
"What's that?"
"I simply meant--that with all the technical perfection here in the
boat, it's really astounding that you still use the sextant to find the
ship's position . . ."
"How else could I do it?"
I can see my observations are out of place. Perhaps it's too early
in the day, I say to myself, and perch on the chart chest.
The navigator picks up the celluloid sheet that covers the chart.
The map of our area of the sea is now uniformly blue-gray. No coastal
edges, no shallows--only a thick network of squares with numbers and
letters on the perpendicular and horizontal lines.
The navigator holds the dividers between his teeth and mutters,
"There it is--a pretty little error, fifteen miles--well, so it goes!"
With a stroke of the pencil he connects our last position with the
new one. He points to a square on the chart. "Things were really wild
here once, almost 'Lash the helm and take to prayer!"
Apparently the navigator is ready for a little more give and take.
He points his dividers at the spot where things were so wild.
The control-room mate now comes up and looks at the network of
squares.
"That was on the fourth patrol. Typical hallelujah voyage. One
attack on top of another. They were after us from the word go. Depth
charges all day. You lost count . . ."
The navigator keeps his eyes on the dividers as though they still
hold signs and portents for him. Then he takes a deep breath, snaps them
together, and abruptly thrusts them away.
"Wasn't at all funny."
I know that he won't say anything more. The control-room mate also
gets back to work. The navigator carefully fits the sextant back into its
case. A tiny hole from the point of his dividers remains in the chart.
Since there is still considerable confusion in the boat I clamber
back onto the bridge so as not to be in the way.
The clouds are now sharply defined mosaics inlaid in the grayblue
sky. One of them drifts in front of the sun. Its shadow wipes away the
greenish-white radiance from the sea. The cloud is so large that its
lower edge dips beneath the horizon, but there are holes in it through
which the sun's rays dart at an angle. The beams seem to come from a
projector, traversing the sea; one of them sweeps directly over our boat,
and for a while it illuminates us like a huge theatrical spotlight.
"AIRCRAFT ON THE LEFT!"
Bosun's mate Dorian's shout hits me like an electric shock. For a
fraction of a second I catch sight of a dark point against the gray
background of cloud and then I'm at the conning tower hatch. Its locking
lever bangs into my coccyx. I almost scream with pain. As I slide down
the ladder I have a clear vision of the leather guard that should be
covering this protruding iron handle.
Below, my leap to the side is too short. The next man is already on
his way down. One of his boots hits me in the neck. I hear the bosun's
mate land with a crash on the floor plates.
"Too damned close!" he exclaims, gasping for air.
The Commander is already standing open-mouthed under the tower,
looking upward.
"_Flood!_" the Second Watch Officer shouts down. The exhaust doors
are drawn aside. From above crashes a wall of water, out of which the
Second Watch Officer emerges dripping.
The needle of the depth manometer moves very slowly, as though
overcoming strong resistance. The boat seems to be glued to the surface.
The Chief roars, "All hands forward!"
The men rush stumbling and crouching through the control room. The
boat finally becomes bow heavy and tilts forward. I have to hold on to
keep my footing.
Breathlessly, the Second Watch Officer reports to the Commander.
"Plane from the left. Out of a hole in the clouds. Type not identified!"
Once again, through closed lids, I can see the black point in front
of the cloud banks. The same sentence goes on repeating itself inside my
head--"Now he's going to drop them--now he's going to drop them!" And
then the word "bombs!"--"bombs!"--"bombs!"
Gasping breath. The Commander doesn't take his eyes off the depth
gauge. His face is expressionless, almost indifferent. Water drops in the
bilge--_tip--tap--tip_. The electric motors hum very softly.
The electric motors? Or is that the gyrocompass?
Nothing?
"Diving stations!" the Chief commands. The men work their way back
up the incline, seeking handholds on either side, like mountain climbers.
"Both hydroplanes up!"
I stand straight, take a deep breath. A piercing pain like a hot
iron shoots through me down to my feet. For the first time I realize how
heavily I hit the hatch lever.
"It's gone!" says the Commander. "Proceed to a hundred feet!"
"Shit!" mutters the navigator.
The Commander stands in the middle of the control room, hands in
his trouser pockets, cap pushed to the back of his head.
"They've spotted us. Here's hoping all hell doesn't break loose."
Then he turns to the Chief. "We'd better stay down a while." And to me,
"I told you yesterday--they know exactly when we put to sea. We're in for
trouble."
I have my second aircraft scare a few hours later during the
navigator's watch. He roars "ALARM!" and I catch a glimpse at forty-five
degrees--a thumb's breadth above the horizon--of a point in the gray. And
I'm already letting myself slide down the metal ladder, guiding my fall
with both hands and feet.
The navigator shouts, "Flood!"
I see him hanging onto the closing wheel of the hatch cover and
searching with his feet for a toehold. Finally he turns the spindle
tight.
"Five!"--"Three, both tanks!"--"One!" A loud gurgling of water
rushing into the buoyancy tanks. "Aircraft at forty-five degrees,
distance ten thousand feet. Not coming directly at us!" reports the
navigator.
The ventilating shafts and exhaust vents of the diesels have been
made fast and both E-motors are coupled to the driving shafts. They are
running at full speed. Instead of the roar of the diesels there is now
only their vibratory hum.
We hold our breath again.
"Boat plunging fast," the Chief reports, then quickly commands,
"Blow submersion cells!" These cells are flooded when the boat is on the
surface, to give it additional weight and to help overcome surface
tension during a quick dive. They have a five-ton capacity; the boat is
now too heavy by this amount. With an explosive roar, compressed air is
released into them, driving the water out with a deafening hiss.
Still no bombs!
It couldn't have taken us more than thirty seconds to submerge
completely. But the water at the point where you dive remains turbulent
for about five minutes. It is into this surge that the Tommies like to
drop their depth charges.
Nothing!
The Old Man expels his breath. The navigator follows suit but less
violently. The control-room mate gives me a faint nod.
At 250 feet the Chief, with complete confidence, has the bow first
pointed upward by the hydroplanes, then downward.
"Boat's in balance!" he now reports. "Close the exhaust vents!"
We stand around in silence for a good five minutes. Finally the Old
Man has us brought up to periscope depth. Both hydroplanes are set hard
up, the E-motors switched to half speed ahead.
The next command startles me. The Chief orders flooding in the
tanks, although the boat is meant to rise. Admittedly not much is
involved; nevertheless the order to flood seems nonsensical. I have to
think hard before I remember: if we rise, the boat expands because the
pressure on it decreases, hence we lose specific gravity; and that must
be equalized so we don't shoot up too fast. To be able to stop the boat
at precisely the desired depth, you have to maintain an exact balance.
"Perhaps he didn't see us at all!" says the Old Man.
The third aircraft alarm comes four hours later. This time it is
the First Watch Officer who roars the order to flood. "Came straight out
of the sun!" he gasps.
"All hands forward!"
More slipping and sliding, wild confusion in the control room.
Anything to get down!
The Chief uses a different trick to get the bow down faster. Only
when the boat has been tipped forward by setting both hydroplanes hard
down does he order the escape vents of the rear buoyancy cells opened.
For a moment he is able to utilize their lifting power to force the bow
down more quickly.
"Third and last strike," mutters the First Watch Officer when it's
clear no bombs are falling.
"I wouldn't tempt Providence quite that far," the Old Man says
dryly.
"They're getting ruder all the time!" The Chief. "No manners these
days!"
"We'll stay down a while. You can't always count on Kramer's kind
of luck."
We move into the 0-Mess. "Good job by the First Watch Officer,"
says the Old Man, loud enough to be heard in the control room. The First
Watch Officer has earned this by spotting the aircraft in time. Not easy,
when a clever bastard sits in his cockpit and flies at you straight out
of the sun. Nine times out of ten it's seagulls. They glide at you with
their rigidly extended wings from just above the horizon and the alarm
cry is out before you realize what they are. In the glittering, blinding,
glassy radiance that dissolves all contours, the illusion is perfect. But
the tenth time, the approaching gull turns into a plane.
"When attacked from the air, always turn to windward," says the Old
Man. "The First Watch Officer did it just right. The plane gets too much
wind on its wing as it banks and it's forced outward. Doesn't make that
much difference, but we need every foot we can get."
"I'll remember."
"As for the flyers they're sending out now, all you can say is--
hats off!" The Old Man bites his lower lip, nods a couple of times, 
narrows his eyes, and says, "There they sit in their windmills,
absolutely alone, and yet they attack like Blücher at Waterloo. They
could simply drop their bombs into the drink and shoot their machine guns
into the blue--who'd know the difference?"
He continues to sing the praises of the Royal Air Force. "The
bomber pilots that attack our bases aren't exactly lily-livered either.
How many was it we brought down last time?"
"Eight," I reply. One crashed almost on our roof in La Baule--
right between the pine trees. I'm never going to eat calves' brains on
toast again."
"What do you mean?"
"There were still three men inside. The cockpit was completely
ripped open. They had brought a lot of sandwiches with them. Snow-white
bread top and bottom, roast meat and lettuce in between, and all over one
of them, the pilot's brains. I wanted to get hold of the papers--anything
at all--but the plane was already on fire and suddenly the machine-gun
ammo started going off, so I had to Scram."
I try to read a nautical handbook. After a while I just catch the
Old Man's voice. "The pilot that got the _Gneisenau_ must have been quite
a boy. No emergency rations in his pocket, just condoms . . ."
I put the book away.
"Obviously he was planning to finish off his mission with a visit
to the whorehouses on the Rue de Ia Paix. The Canadians are practi cal
about these things," says the Chief.
"Alas, that's where he made his mistake," says the Old Man. "But
what a mad performance! Down in a spiral glide. Nobody noticed anything
at first. No flak! No shooting! And then to position himself perfectly
and release the bomb. Pure circus stuff! It was a shame he didn't come
out of it! They say he hit the water like a stone. Well, we might as well
try again. . ."
I climb into the control room behind the Old Man and the Chief.
The Chief reports, "Boat ready to surface!"
"Surface!" orders the Commander and climbs up the ladder.
"Blow the tanks!"
The Chief stares at the sinking of the water column in the
Papenberg, then reports, "Conning tower hatch clear."
The Commander's voice comes from above. "Tower hatch being opened!"
"Equalize pressure!" calls the Chief.
"Let's hope those damn mosquitoes leave us alone now," I hear the
navigator say.
The control room a half hour before midnight. The soft humming of
the ventilators. Through the open tower hatch the diesels suck in a
stream of fresh air. The few lights are shielded so that no rays can find
their way upward and betray us to a night flyer. The darkness extends the
room to infinity. Out of the uncertain depths of the shadows gleam the
green phosphorescent arrows that direct us to the tower hatch in moments
when all lights fail. These indicators are fairly recent. They were
installed only after the disaster on Kallmann's boat. In the fall of 1940
in the Brunsbüttel channel, Kallmann collided with a Norwegian freighter.
His little boat, without watertight bulkheads, was hit directly behind
the control room and split open so completely that it sank in seconds.
Only those on deck escaped. When the boat was raised--Kallmann had to be 
present-- some of the crew were found in the control room crowded
together not under the tower but on the other side of the periscope
shaft. In exactly the wrong place.
But are our green arrows really any use? If the boat sinks here, it
will sink thousands of feet and the pointers can go on gleaming till
Doomsday.
In the semi-darkness the control room is huge. The only gleam of
light is forward, where it sharply defines the circle of the hatch
opening and the other end of the compartment. The light comes from the
radio shack and from the lamp burning in the passage to the Officers'
Mess. I can make out two men in the glow. They're sitting on the chart
chest, peeling potatoes. Dimly visible, the officer of the watch in the
control room is leaning against a stand-up table and noting down in the
daily log the contents of the trim tanks. Gurgling and hissing, the bilge
water sloshes back and forth under the floor plates. The two closed
hatches beyond the petty officers' quarters lessen the noise of the
diesels; it sounds filtered. The waves running alongside the boat fill
the control room with a fluctuating roar.
I climb through the forward hatch. The radioman, Hinrich, his
headset on his ears, is deep in a book. He's supporting himself with his
elbows on the tabletops, right and left, that hold his apparatus. He
looks as if he's on crutches. The green curtain has been drawn in front
of the Commander's bunk opposite the radio shack. But a narrow slit is
emitting light; so the Commander is not asleep either. Very likely he's
writing in bed as usual, letters he won't be able to send until we return
to base.
With no one sitting at the table, the 0-Mess now seems unnaturally
large. The Chief is asleep in his bunk behind the table. Close above his
face, his watch dangles on its short chain, a random pendulum swinging in
all directions.
In the lower berth to port, behind the curtain, the First Watch
Officer is sleeping before going on duty. The door to the bow compartment
opens with a crash. The Chief turns over with a grunt and goes on
snoring, his face toward the lockers. A man with a rumpled topknot of
hair comes in, mutters a sleepy greeting, blinks uncertainly for several
seconds, and then resolutely draws back the First Watch Officer's
curtain. "Twenty minutes to, Herr Leutnant,"
The sleep-fuddled face of the First Watch Officer emerges into the
light from the deep shadows of the bunk. He works one leg out from under
the covers, pushes it stiffly over the bunk railing, and rolls his body
after it. The whole performance looks like a slowmotion film of a high
jump. I don't want to irritate him by watching, so I go on forward.
In the bow compartment the master mechanic Johann is sitting at the
table with a woeful expression on his face. He yawns and says, "Morning,
Herr Leutnant!"
"Bit early for that!"
Johann ignores this and slowly raises himself to his feet.
Two weak bulbs provide the bow compartment with no more than halflight. A heavy, sour fug meets me: sweat, oil, bilge, the smell of wet
clothing.
Here, toward the bow, is where you feel the rolling of the boat
most. Two shadowy figures are staggering back and forth in front of the
torpedo tube supports. I hear them cursing. "Anti-social bastards! Enough
to drive you to revolution. Middle of the night!"
From the hammocks emerge two men, then a third from a portside
bunk.
"Fuck it all!" That must be Ario.
Since the boat is rolling heavily, the two of them make a number of
fruitless attempts before they succeed in getting their seaboots on.
"Filthy weather, eh?" one says. "Going to get our feet wet again!"
They work their way into heavy sweaters and wrap towels around their
necks so that no water can get in under their collars once they put their
rubber jackets on in the control room.
The men of the preceding watch come down the ladder stiffly. They
are soaking wet. The navigator has turned up his collar and drawn his
sou'wester down over his face. The faces of the others are whipped red by
the spray. All of them hang their binoculars over hooks and undress as
silently as the new watch dressed, peeling themselves awkwardly and
heavily out of their rubber jackets. Then they help one another off with
their rubber pants. The youngest member of the watch loads himself with
the whole mass of wet oilskin trousers, jackets, and sou'westers, and
carries it aft. The spaces between the two electric motors and on both
sides of the stern torpedo tube are the best for drying.
The men who have come off duty gulp down a mouthful of hot coffee,
polish their binoculars, and stow them away.
"Bearing up?" the navigator asks me.
Bosun's mate Wichmann moves aft, the navigator with the two
lookouts forward.
For a while there's only the roar of the sea and the drone of the
engines, until the control-room mate turns on the bilge pump.
All at once there's heavy traffic in the control room. The new
engine-room watch is going on duty. I recognize the diesel stoker Ario
and the E-stoker Zörner.
In the U-room Wichmann has planted himself at the table. Chewing
hungrily.
I climb into my bunk. Now I can hear the waves close to my ear
rushing past the boat. There is a long scraping and gurgling that rises
and falls and sometimes mounts to a whistling hiss.
The hatch from the galley is kicked open. Bosun's mate Kleinschmidt
and E-mate Rademacher appear.
"Leave something for us, you glutton! Whenever I see you, you're
stuffing yourself."
"Crap!"
Through a crack in my curtain I see Wichmann unembarrassedly
scratching his crotch. He even lifts himself slightly to get at it
better.
"Get your joystick out of the way, man! This is no place for a hand
job."
"I'll fuck _you_ in a minute!" Wichmann retorts.
This dialogue has apparently aroused a memory in Kleinschmidt. He
giggles so audibly that everyone stops to listen.
"Something happened to me in a Paris bistro. I'm just sitting there
at a table and opposite me on a kind of sofa there's a Negro with a whore
and she keeps on feeling him up under the table. In Paris there's no
holds barred."
Rademacher nods in agreement.
"All at once the Negro begins panting loudly and rolling his eyes.
I think, 'This has got to be seen,' and push my chair back, and I see him
just as he comes--all over my shoe!"
"You're joking!"
"What did you do then?" Rademacher wants to know.
"I just sat there thunderstruck. But you ought to have seen them--
they took off like greased lightning!"
"Holy shit--the things that happen." Rademacher is still astounded.
Wichmann has apparently taken till now to digest the story
properly. He leans back and announces, "Those French are real swine!"
It takes another good quarter of an hour for the U-room to settle
down.
In the battle log, the first two days have been recorded as
follows:
SATURDAY
08.00 Departure.
16.30 Trial dive.
18.00 Deep-dive test.
SUNDAY
07.46 Aircraft alarm with emergency measures and deep dive.
10.55 Aircraft alarm.
15.44 Aircraft alarm.
16.05 Cruising in attack area.
"You've still got eyes like an albino rabbit," the Chief needles
me. It's the third day at sea.
"No wonder--those last days on shore were pretty rough."
"That's what I heard. They say you were right there for the famous
brawl in the Majestic. That was the night before Thomsen-- right?"
"Exactly. You really missed something. You should have seen the
Commissioner of Works flying through the plate-glass window!"
"How did it happen?"
"You know all about Scholle yourself--how he considers himself
essential to the war effort? Well, this clod starts out by paying for a
round of drinks. The men are being halfway polite. Herr Scholle seems to
have had a few already and is obviously feeling on top of the world.
Nothing can stop him. He's actually acting as if he belongs--as if
everyone has been waiting for him!"
I see the dueling scars--red whipmarks--on his two hamster cheeks.
I see Herr Scholle gesticulating wildly, then wavering slowly back and
forth, beginning to orate, beer foam smeared around his mouth.
"Fantastic, simply fantastic. This magnificent success! Splendid fellows-
-sterling characters! _Jawohl!_" I see the contemptuous glances of the
crowd and hear the loud question, "What in hell is this asshole doing
here?" But Herr Commissioner Scholle is deaf to everything but himself.
"Stiffen your spines--bring Albion to her knees. _Jawohl!_ The fighters
at the front can rely on us. Sacrifice everything for the Homeland!
Dedicated knights!"
"He was talking absolute garbage," I tell the Chief. "The whole
propaganda bulishit about unflinching spirit at the front and so on. And
obviously including himself right up there. Markus has been boiling for
quite a while, but he's behaving himself. It's only when Scholle claps
him on the shoulder and shouts 'Up and at 'em,' then belches, and to top
it all off hollers, 'Ach, just a few shitty depth charges!' that Markus
blows a fuse. You should have seen it. He went bright red and gagged on
his words, as though he'd lost his breath. But the others--they were up
on their feet in a single motion. Table and chairs, everything knocked
over. They grabbed the Commissioner by the wrists and ankles and off they
went through the bar-- half dragging him, half carrying him_right down
the corridor. The idea was to heave him through the door with a kick in
his brass-hat ass. But the bosun suddenly had a better one. Probably
because they were holding the Commissioner at both ends like a hammock,
the bosun had them line him up, roaring and struggling, parallel to the
big plate-glass window, then ordered, 'One good hard swing and at the
count of three, let go!' They got the idea. 'One--and two-- and three'--
you should have seen it. The Commissioner sailed through the air, there
was the crash of breaking glass, and he was lying on the street."
I can still hear the impact and the splintering of the glass on the
pavement and the bosun saying, "That's that!" But it isn't. Silently the
four about-face, march back through the long room to their places, dust
off their hands as though they had been touching something dirty, and
reach for their glasses. "Stupid pig!" says one of the crew.
Suddenly someone else yells, "There he is again!" and points toward
the entrance. Through the haze in the doorway looms a bloody face.
"He's looking for his Himmler spectacles!"
They're on their feet again. Drunk as they are, they're at the door
in a flash and dragging the Commissioner of Works across the threshold.
One of them kicks loose the Commissioner's leg, which is caught in the
door jamb. Then the door is slammed. "Perhaps he's had enough now, the
stupid cunt!"
"And then all that business with the military police?"
"Apparently they turned up an hour later when only the petty
officers and the men were left, and there was a real brawl. One of the
police got a flesh wound in the upper thigh."
"Throughout the flotilla there was general regret," said the Chief,
"that it was not something else that got hit."
I know why the Chief has such a grudge against the watchdogs and
all so-called security agencies. He was on his way back from leave in
Paris on the Admiral's train and had made himself comfortable for a doze
in the midday heat--bottom button of his jacket undone, slumped down in
his seat, alone in the compartment with a lieutenant--when the door was
pushed open and the comedy began. He described the whole thing to me in
the Royal. "Suddenly some sweaty bastard was standing there all in field
gray, helmeted, booted and spurred, leg-o'-mutton breeches of course,
full war paint--a cannon at his waist. And through the two side windows
his two watchdogs staring in like oxen. 'Your travel orders, Herr
Oberleutnant, and will you kindly look to your uniform. You are not on
board ship here!'"
The Chief, according to him, got to his feet but did not do up the
button. Instead, he undid all the others, fumbled for his papers, handed
them to the steel-helmeted heinie, and shoved his hands down into his
trouser pockets.
"You should have seen him. He almost exploded! He was bellowing
like a steer. 'I shall report you! I shall report you!'"
At which point I said to the Chief, "That so? Maybe that's why they
decided to replace you and send us that Hitler Youth as your understudy.
U-boat Headquarters probably decided they could no longer regard you as
the kind of model our Führer wants for the crew!"
I can still see the Chief gaping in astonishment. But then he began
to glow like a lighted Christmas tree. Apparently I'd said the right
thing.
Monday evening in the Officers' Mess. 20.00. I can't grasp the fact
that this is only our third day at sea. The land lies so far astern that
we could already be hundreds of miles away. I have to make an effort to
convince myself that it was only last Friday evening at this time that
the brawl was beginning in the Bar Royal.
"Deep thoughts?" inquires the Old Man.
"No, not exactly. I was just thinking about Thomsen."
"That uniform! He'd better get rid of it," says the Old Man.
_Tuesday. Fourth Day at Sea._ The Chief is strolling about,
apparently at leisure. A good opportunity for me to coax some technical
information out of him. All I need to say is, "It's all so damned
complicated," and he's off. "You can say that again. A damned sight more
complicated than ordinary steamers, which simply float out to sea on the
same principle as a washtub on a pond. They've all got their own
characteristic trim and their own constant buoyancy. So-and-so-many gross
registered tons and so-and-so-many tons of cargo. And if they load more
on, the scow just sinks a little lower and the water comes up over the
Plimsoll line. That's all there is to it, nothing to worry about. At
worst it's a matter for the Maritime Authorities. But with us any excess
weight demands special countermeasures . . ." The Chief stops, nervously
hoods his eyes. I'm afraid he may not go on, and keep staring at him. He
lets me wait.
Floating, being borne up by water, is a phenomenon I've always
found hard to grasp. Not wooden rowboats--but iron ships seemed like a
miracle to me as a child. Iron floating on water! I even saw concrete
ships with sides as thick as bunkers on the Elbe one day, and I couldn't
believe those vast masses would float, let alone carry cargoes.
Although I understand the functioning of the ship's equipment and
the sequence of maneuvers, diving and resurfacing continue to baffle me.
The fact that a U-boat can eliminate its own buoyancy and get it back
again at will never ceases to fascinate me.
When the Chief starts up again he sounds like a lecturer. "The soto-speak fundamental difference is this: we achieve our buoyancy not like
ordinary scows, through the water we displace, but through the air in the
cells. So what keeps us on the surface is a kind of life preserver. When
we blow the air out, we sink."
The Chief stops until I nod.
"We have to watch our weight like hawks. It must always remain the
same. At an alarm, there's no time for fumbling around. Everything goes
insanely fast. So we have to trim the boat for diving in advance--that
is, while we're still traveling on the surface. This means we must keep 
the weight steady by means of the trim cells. Then when there's an alarm,
all we still have to do is eliminate the lift in the buoyancy cells. Once
the boat is underwater, its own weight doesn't tilt it up or down."
The Chief pauses to inquire, "Got it?"
"Yes, Chief."
"At the desired depth, the weight of the boat must exactly equal
that of the water it's displacing, so that the boat hovers perfectly,
ready to react precisely to the smallest push from the propellers and be
easily maneuvered up or down, right or left, by the hydroplanes or the
rudder. It mustn't have any tendency to sink or to rise. Unfortunately
the boat's weight changes every day, through the consumption of
provisions--water and fuel, for example. The crazy thing, however, is
that not even the weight of the water displaced by the boat remains
constant. So everything is always changing. You can never stop
calculating. You hardly dare to cough."
He pauses for breath. Gets a bottle of apple juice from the locker.
Pulls the tin cap off on the hinge of the locker door and raises the
bottle to his mouth.
He has hardly wiped his lips when he starts up again. "The thing
that gives us the most trouble is the changing specific gravity of water.
If we were diving in fresh water everything would be simpler. Then all
we'd have to do every day would be to add the same weight of water to the
trim cells as we used up in food, oil, and water, and that would be that.
But in salt water it's very tricky. There's no getting away from it. In
this pond, water is not just water. Our buoyancy changes from day to day-
-even from hour to hour."
He pauses again and glances at me to observe the effect he's
having.
"The specific gravity of salt water is influenced by every
imaginable factor. Depth, temperature, the time of year, the various
currents. Even the sea life--plankton, for example--affects it ap
preciably. A little more plankton in the water and we have to pump. And
it depends on the sun as well."
"On the sun?"
"Yes, the sun causes evaporation, which increases salt content.
Greater salt content in the water and the specific gravity goes up."
"But aren't the differences minimal?"
He ponders for a while, frowning deeply. "A difference in the
specific gravity of the water--well, let's take a really minimal one, of
one one-thousandth--that means that the weight of the boat, to maintain
its balance, must also be changed by one one-thousandth. Now assume that
the boat weighs eight hundred and eighty tons. So: a change of one onethousandth gives us a bit over sixteen hundred pounds. That much of a
difference would make for a serious mistake in calculating the content of
the trim cells. To keep the boat adequately poised, we have to weight it
out with the help of the trim tanks to within eleven pounds. I say
adequately because in practice it's impossible to weigh out the boat so
accurately that it remains poised without the help of propellers and
hydroplanes. Even a pint--as a matter of fact, even a thimbleful--too
much of water in the tanks would make it rise. So every day that God the
Cloudmaker allows to dawn, we have to use the densimeter to determine the
specific gravity of the seawater around us."
The Chief is enjoying the sound of his own eloquence. He's
blossoming, as though the whole science of submarining had originated
with him.
The Commander, who has been listening for some time, goes by and
asks, "Well, professor, is all that stuff really true?" as he climbs
through the forward hatch.
Immediately the Chief is disconcerted. When he begins again, it's
in a plaintive tone. "All the Old Man's interested in is balancing the
boat precisely--not a quart too much, not a quart too little . .
The Chief seems to have finished. However, I can see he's searching
for a suitable closing sentence.
"Hell," he says finally, "the fact is, we put to sea with a lot of
physics. . ."
"And chemistry."
"Yes, and chemistry too--that we don't really use. Keep your
fingers crossed," says the Chief. "If it ever really does come down to
chemistry, we'll be needing psychology too. And at that point we'll be
right up the ass of the Prophet!"
He suddenly has to leave. I have no chance to ask him what he
means.
At the noon meal the Old Man looks merry. No one knows what's
cheered him up so. He's even joking in a way I haven't noticed before.
The Chief appears at last.
"Well, Chief?" he asks in a self-satisfied undertone.
"All in order, Herr Kaleun!"
The Commander cordially invites him to sit down on the corner of
the bunk. This deliberate friendliness alarms the Chief. Furtively he
peers at each of us. I can imagine what's about to happen: as I was
coming through the control room I saw the Commander secretly slip a small
note into the hand of the control-room officer.
Within a few minutes the alarm bell peals. The Chief has difficulty
scrambling to his feet. On the ceiling the flooding valve rods begin to
turn. The plates on the table start slipping.
"Hold tight!"
The Chief shoots an embittered glance at the Old Man, but it does
no good--he has to struggle into the control room.
"Very good. Quick as a weasel!" the Old Man jeers after him.
The uproar coming from the control room confirms my belief that
this is not a simple test alarm; it sounds very much like a disaster
exercise.
Everything on the table skids forward, crashing and clattering----
I'm already stepping on splintered plates.
The bow is getting steadily heavier.
A questioning glance from the Second Watch Officer. But the
Commander continues to behave as if all this had nothing to do with him.
From the control room comes the alarm cry: "Breach above the water
gauge!"
Instead of leaping to his feet, the Commander favors the Second
Watch Officer with a broad grin, until the latter finally grasps that
this is a carefully prepared accident.
The Old Man takes fiendish pleasure in the curses and uproar coming
from the control room. He gets heavily to his feet and lumbers his way 
there like a cautious mountain climber. Rattling and tinkling everywhere,
then a loud crash. Some massive object must have tipped over. The boat is
now attempting a headstand.
The First Watch Officer is looking surly. We gather the knives and
forks together in a corner of the leather sofa. Goddam mess! The whole
table is smeared with remains of food. Unfair of the Old Man to choose a
mealtime!
"The crew has to get used to this sort of thing. The Tommies have
no consideration either--practice is half the battle!" The Old Man's
mockery only adds to the confusion.
Thank god. The boat is gradually coming back to an even keel. Now
he turns considerate. He fixes the depth at two hundred feet. The steward
comes and silently cleans up the mess.
After a quarter of an hour the Chief appears, completely drenched
and out of breath. The Commander loans him his own furlined vest and
pours out his tea with exaggerated courtesy.
"It all went off very well!"
The Chief acknowledges the praise with a sour look.
"Now, now, now!" says the Commander.
The Chief leans back against the wall and lays his hands in his
lap, palms up. They are smeared with oil. The Old Man looks at him
disapprovingly. "But Chief--what will our First Watch Officer think if
you appear at the table like this?"
The First Watch Officer instantly turns red. The Chief pushes his
hands into his trouser pockets and asks, "Better this way? As a matter of
fact, I've already eaten."
"But Chief! You're starting to lose weight. Eat, drink, and be
merry my children." The Old Man is munching away with bulging cheeks.
Then in the same derisive tone he asks, "Wasn't there something you
wanted to fix on the port diesel? Now's the time. And perhaps you'll have
the starboard diesel overhauled while you're at it? We can stay down as
long as it takes. Anything you like!"
What can the Chief do but disappear aft looking resigned?
The Old Man grins around the table and says, "Let's get some life
into this damn tub! That endless loafing around back at base still sticks
in my throat."
Ever since we've been at sea, the Commander has appeared to be in
high spirits, or at least quietly content. He even came back early from
leave. The boat could perfectly well have been readied without him, but
no, he had to be there.
From his sacrifice of a whole week's leave, the crew has naturally
enough concluded that he's not exactly rolling in domestic bliss.
Apparently no one knows anything definite about his private life.
Even I can construct a picture of it only from reluctant reminiscences,
cynical marginalia, and my own observations. From time to time he looks
through letters, all of them written in green ink with enormous
handwriting. The lady who wrote them is said to be a flyer's widow. Her
father is a magistrate. The Old Man once let something fall about a piano
with candelabra--red candles--and "very beautiful evening dresses."
Looking disgruntled, he made occasional remarks about this last leave as
well. He "constantly" had to keep his decoration around his neck; he had
to go shopping with her. "And that wasn't all I had to put up with. 
Ridiculous. Every evening something going on. Endless company. Makes you
dizzy. I was even supposed to give lectures in schools--I just said
'count me out.'
"What people like us want on leave is simply a change of clothes,
and hours in the bathtub. Not to be bothered, no newspapers, no radio,
turn everything off, stretch out. But then they lay out a beautifully
pressed Sunday afternoon dress uniform, complete with dagger and
scabbard. Snowy-white shirt, silk tie, black lisle socks, and crown it
all with the hand-polished decoration on an absolutely spotless black,
white, and red rep ribbon. God almighty!"
Work in the engine room is over in an hour. The Commander orders us
up.
The bridge watch gets ready under the tower hatch.
"Surface!"
"Forward hydroplane up ten, aft hydroplane up five!" The Chief
initiates the maneuver.
"Blow the tanks!"
Compressed air hisses out of the steel cylinders into the buoyancy
tanks. The water is being driven out through the open flooding doors on
the bottom.
"Boat rising. Conning tower free. Boat surfaced!" reports the
Chief. The tower hatch is opened and the excess pressure equalized.
Ventilate with diesels!"
The watch climbs up. The rocking of the boat has already changed to
a forward motion. The lapping of the waves becomes a sharp hissing. When
the ventilation has been completed the Commander orders, "Dismiss from
diving stations!"
A stoker climbs up into the tower. He lights a cigarette, crouches
down on his haunches to the left of the helmsman and gives himself up
with closed eyes to the pleasures of tobacco. Before he has finished,
there are cries from below of men waiting in line for his place.
Afternoon. The boat has been running on the surface for two hours--
at "twice half speed" for a change, but without the dynamos turning,
since the batteries are already fully charged. At this speed, the boats
make from fourteen to fifteen miles an hour, no faster than a good
cyclist.
ALARM! The bell strikes straight to my heart. I catch my breath.
A man tumbles out of the head with his trousers half down. "Co
ahead, shit your fill," I hear someone behind him call.
The diesels have stopped--the boat is already tilting.
Now what's going on? Isn't the Chief ever going to stop the dive?
All at once it dawns on me that this alarm is for real.
We stay submerged for no more than a quarter of an hour. Then the
waves are hissing along our steel hull again.
"That strikes me--as being enough--for one day," the Chief remarks.
"Balls," says the Old Man.
"The Old Man and the Tommies are a perfect team," I hear from
bosun's mate Zeitler in the bow compartment. "They keep you moving."
III FRIGGING AROUND: I
_Wednesday. Fifth Day at Sea._ Strumming from the radio half wakes
me, then the door to the galley slams into its frame. The room resounds
with a confusion of voices. The E-rnate Pilgrim. "Steward, what's this
cunt mess doing here on the table? Get cracking! Out it goes!"
I glance below through the crack in the curtains. The bosun's mate
Wichmann is staring at a blob of mixed-fruit jam on the table and
growling, "Looks as though the lady of the house was flying Pennant Z."
Pilgrim and Wichmann seem to have one-track minds, but sometimes I don't
understand either their vocabulary or their references.
"Little Snow White and Rose Red," Wichmarin says. His eyes are set
wide apart and protrude slightly, so his face, despite its narrow chin,
is rather like a frog's. To keep his black hair combed straight back and
lying flat, he carefully squeezes a tube of pomade between the teeth of
his comb and then distributes it conscientiously over his head. He likes
to describe the kind of life he wants-- theater, nightclubs, lots of good
company--this is what he calls his "dream." A bragger, who keeps harping
on his interrupted college education. But despite his loud talk, Wichmann
is considered a good sailor; he is said to have been the first to spot
more than one convoy.
The E-mate Pilgrim is from Thuringia, like his colleague
Rademacher; he's small and pale, with a pointed beard. Only he talks more
than Rademacher.
Pilgrim and Wichmann are swapping stories about a certain lady in
the sailor's cathouse.
"I can't take her constant whining. 'Don't go off in my hair.'
That's her problem. Too much ladylike crap!"
"But she knows her stuff all right otherwise."
"She's got a good ass, you have to admit that."
Pause. Then Pilgrim's voice again. "I screwed that little girl from
the flower stall on a bench in the park. But I didn't get a scumbagful
till I got home and went to work on myself."
I struggle out of my bunk.
My tongue is sticking to the back of my mouth like a piece of
leather. Nausea fills my throat.
Finally I make it to the control room and manage a clear enough
voice to ask, "Permission to come on the bridge?"
"_Jawohl!_" The Second Watch Officer cries from above.
Bending over the boat's railing, I stare at the water shooting
along below me, roaring and hissing, churned up with air into a milky
froth. Bubbles and streamers of foam combine in an endless tapestry of
constantly changing patterns. My eyes are drawn aft by the white
streamers. A long path a few yards wide marks our course. On it, the high
choppy waves are smoothed out as though the train of a long dress had
swept over them and flattened all the flashing crests.
I ask the Second Watch Officer, "What is Pennant Z?"
He responds promptly. "The signal for attack. It's red."
"Filthy swine," I exclaim involuntarily.
The Second Watch Officer stares at me in surprise.
"Thanks," I say, and disappear again down the hatch.
The helmsman in the tower hardly needs to touch the rudder. The
same number on the compass card swings back and forth under the central
mark. Two hundred sixty-five degrees. We are running on a constant
course. According to the navigator, it will take us ten days at cruising
speed to reach our area of operations. We could be there sooner if we ran
the diesels at high speed. But we've chosen cruising speed in order to
save fuel. We need all our reserves for the hunt.
At breakfast I wait in vain for the Commander.
The alarm bell makes me jump. Airplanes, I think. Fucking vermin--
you can always count on them!
Then I catch sight of the Old Man through the circular hatch in the
control room. He's looking at his stopwatch. Thank god. Practice alarm.
He's seeing how long it takes the boat to get under water.
I squeeze to one side out of the way of the sudden scramble. The
boat is already pitching downward. I try to keep the plates on the table,
but two or three slide off.
I can't help thinking of all the things that have happened during
practice alarms. On Kerschbaumer's boat, they closed the intake valve to
the depth manometer by mistake. Kerschbaumer wanted to take his boat down
250 feet fast. The boat went down all right, but the manometer needle
didn't move, so Kretschbaumer thought the boat was stuck on the surface
and ordered more flooding, then more, until suddenly they noticed the
mistake. But by then the boat was already 6oo feet down--with a shipyard
guarantee of 300!
We're at our midday meal when the next practice alarm takes place.
The Chief jumps up, knocking a full soup tureen from the table straight
into the Second Watch Officer's lap.
The Old Man still appears dissatisfied after this second alarm. Not
a word of appreciation.
At 16.00 on the dot comes the third.
The teacups on the table are smashed to bits.
"If this goes on, we'll be eating with our paws and drinking out of
buckets," I hear the bosun complaining.
At last the Commander says, "Okay that time!"
Seated at the chart table in the control room, I'm trying to learn
more about technical matters. An incipient row between Frenssen and
Wichmann--the eternal conflict between engineers and sailors-- is headed
off by the arrival of the navigator. There's only enough time for
Wichmann to call Frenssen's diesels "farters" and Frenssen to shove his
oil-smeared fists in Wichmann's face.
With peace restored, I return to concentrating on the layout of the
cells. In the diving arrangements of a U-boat the buoyancy cells take
first place. There are three of them, located inside and outside the
pressure hull. The inside cell is so large that if the two outer ones are
damaged the boat can go on floating.
On the underside of the buoyancy cells are the flood doors, above
them the air vents. Both must be opened before we can dive. As the air
escapes through the vents, the water pours in through the flood doors to
replace it. The boat has buoyancy tanks as well as buoyancy cells. These
lie in the outer ship, and when the boat leaves base they are full of 
fuel oil. Only when this oil has been used up do they start to function
as air reservoirs, giving the boat additional lift.
In addition to the buoyancy cells and tanks the boat has both
regulator and trim cells. Weight lost by consumption of food, water, and
fuel is made up for by taking seawater aboard in the regulator cells,
located on the ceiling of the control room.
The trim cells serve to control the position of the boat
underwater. If the boat is either bow heavy or stern heavy, it can be
brought back to even keel by exchange of water between the two cells--
that is, by achieving trim state zero. The trim cells are of the utmost
importance; they are our balancing pole, for underwater the boat has a
tendency to rock lengthwise as well as from side to side. With surface
vessels it's different; in a rough sea, naturally, they roll heavily from
side to side, but they don't tend to stand on their head.
With U-boats underwater, however, pitching of as much as forty
degrees is common. In contrast to surface ships the U-boat in its
submerged state is extremely sensitive to changes in weight and is hard
to keep on an even keel. For this reason the designers gave the trim
cells the greatest possible effectiveness by placing them at the extreme
ends of the boat.
If a hundredweight of potatoes is moved from the control room to
the bow compartment when the boat is submerged, bow heaviness results. To
compensate for this, water has to be pumped from the control room to the
stern cell--only half the weight of the potatoes, though, because the
water for the trim cell is taken from the opposite end of the boat. The
foreship is thereby made lighter by one half the weight of the potatoes.
If a hundredweight of potatoes were taken from the E-motor room into the
bow compartment, the trim calculation would, of course, be different. In
that case water would have to be pumped from the bow to the stern.
I memorize the rule of thumb: control cells regulate rise and fall
of boat; trim cells regulate position in water.
After the evening meal I climb as quickly as possible into my bunk,
dog-tired.
God knows the sailors I share the compartment with are at no pains
to restrain themselves out of any consideration for me. When I'm lying in
my bunk, they return with complete abandon to topic number one.
Apparently all I need to do is close my curtain and I cease to exist for
them. I remind myself of a zoologist: the animals I'm studying have
become accustomed to me.
The day began with Pilgrim and Wichmann; now Frenssen and Zeitler
see me to bed. Their obscene imaginations appear to be inexhaustible. I
would give a lot to find out whether they really have had all the
adventures they're always boasting about. Are they actually the seasoned
whorehouse veterans they pretend to be? It's not hard to credit them with
almost anything.
The bosun's mate Zeitler is a North German. His pale, innocent face
with its sparse growth of beard suits neither his cynical talk nor his
weightlifter's build. He's said to be a first-rate sailor; nothing upsets
him. He belongs to the first watch. If I'm not wrong, the Old Man thinks
more of him than of the First Watch Officer.
The diesel mechanic mate Frenssen is a thick-set fellow who exudes
arrogant self-assurance wherever he goes. Not the slightest hint of selfdoubt ever creases his forehead.
Frenssen comes from Kottbus. He likes to appear hard-nosed; the
perfect cynical desperado from a third-rate cowboy film. His grim, sliteyed stare is something he must have practiced in front of a mirror. The
diesel stokers Ario and Sablonski, who are in his watch, can't have a
very easy time of it. He's not more than twenty-two. His bunk is directly
under mine.
Through my half-drawn curtain I hear, "It stinks like a pigpen in
here."
"What do you expect it to smell like--a cathouse?"
Groans and yawns.
"So something really happened?"
"I'll say!"
For a while there is only munching to be heard.
"You're just jealous because you only got your finger up."
"Fuck off! Anything you can do with your cock I can do better with
my big toe."
"Yeah, if you come from Kottbus, you do it with your toe!"
Sounds of the exhaust pumps, organ-like yawns and gasps.
"In any case, no more fucking now. Somebody else is humping them
all, yours included."
"What a brain! You ought to get yourself promoted to the General
Staff with a bright little head like yours. They need people like you to
stick the little flags in."
"Ought to have corked her up to keep out any cunt-mates!"
Rattle of dishes, scraping of boots.
My curtain bulges inward as someone makes his way between the table
and the starboard bunks. Then I hear their voices again.
"A little recreation wouldn't hurt at all after a leave like that.
One air raid after another. It's downright peaceful here by comparison."
"Just keep your fingers crossed!"
"Can't get laid properly any more. Not even at noon in the arbor."
Then comes the explanation: "You know, they have a garden with a
kind of summerhouse in it. Sofa, icebox_everything ready to go. But you
barely get started when the fucking sirens go off, and the dumb twat gets
nervous--and there's the end of your fun!"
_Thursday. Sixth Day at Sea._ In the morning, before breakfast, I'm
on the bridge with the Commander.
The sky is covered with turquoise batik clouds bound together by
fine veins. Everywhere a reddish background shows through. Slowly the
background begins to brighten and outshine the blue of the clouds. A red
glitter takes over the eastern sky, breaking through at every opening.
The expanses of cloud are penetrated by brilliant points of light. Then
slowly the flashing and glittering grow paler, as though the light were
going out. The colors soften; the sun has risen behind the cloud cover.
"Pleasant sea today!" says the Commander.
At the changing of the watch I think I've discovered new faces.
"Never seen that man," I mutter as another unknown comes out of the
tower hatch.
"Fifty men are a lot," says the Old Man. "There have been times
when I myself didn't recognize members of my own crew. Some of them are
real masters of disguise, of course, absolutely unrecognizable when their
Passion-play beards are gone. After getting back to port, when they've 
shaved and then come on watch, I ask myself how on earth I could have put
to sea with this kindergarten. They're just kids, nurslings who belong at
their mothers' breasts . . . I've often thought: please, god, only photos
of returning boats for the newsreels and the papers; with bearded crews.
No departure pictures, if only out of consideration for the enemy's
feelings."
As usual the Old Man leaves me a while to puzzle out what he means
by that. "The Tommies really would have something to be ashamed of if
they saw just who was making life such hell for them: a kindergarten with
a few Hitler Youths for officers. You feel old as the hills among all
these kids--it's a real children's crusade."
The Old Man has changed; I've never seen him the way he is now. He
used to be discontented, yet introverted, meditative, phlegmatic. Now
he's talking openly--with pauses, as is his custom, but consecutively.
Things have now found their permanent place in the boat. No chart
chest to block the passage, and you don't have to run around ducking your
head. The crew no longer has swollen eyes. A rhythm has been found, the
ship's routine established--a blessing after the confusion of the first
days. Nevertheless I feel as if there were a thin membrane stretched
between me and reality. I seem to be living in a kind of trance. The
consternation that I felt at first when presented with the many pipes,
manometers, machines, and valves has at last subsided. Now I know about
the various pipes--which cells they lead to and even by which valves they
can be shut off; hand wheels, levers, and the tangle of cables have
sorted themselves out into a comprehensible system, and I feel a respect
for this world of machinery dedicated to practical purposes.
Nevertheless, there is still a great deal I can only accept with
astonishment, as purely miraculous.
I still don't comprehend the Second Engineer. I can't tell whether
his failure to react to the Commander's provocations is due to obstinacy
or lack of wit. Even when the Commander meets him more than hallway with
jovial good humor, he fails to respond. He's probably completely devoid
of imagination, the typical product of a one-sided education designed to
turn out mass-produced, brainless, dutiful performers, utterly committed
to the Führer.
His private life I know only in broadest outline, hardly more than
what is recorded in the personnel file. But I'm just as ignorant about
the other officers too.
I do learn something about the Chief's home life. His wife is
expecting a child. His mother is dead. During this last leave he visited
his father. "Not a success," he informed me. "My father goes in for trays
inlaid with iridescent blue butterflies. And cut-glass liqueur glasses.
And liqueurs he makes himself. He used to be director of a waterworks. I
brought him all sorts of supplies, but he refused to eat any of them--
'food taken out of the mouths of men at the front,' and that kind of
nonsense. In the mornings he would march up and down beside my bed, up
and down, never a word, only silent reproaches. The room I had to sleep
in was a nightmare; the Sistine angels over the bed, a piece of birchbark
with picture postcards glued to it. Pathetic, really, a widower like
that. The way he lives: soup three times a day and one hot drink in the 
evenings. It's funny, everything about him is blue: face, hands, clothes-
-all blue. In the evening he lays his clothes over four chairs, picks
them up again, lays them down again. Once he designed a sink. He's still
living on the strength of it today. Inventor's fame. Now he twists wires
into vegetable baskets and barters them for food. He grows the yeast for
his bread himself. Horrible stuff. 'Extremely palatable,' he says. 'I'm
going to give some to the ladies. It's important to give pleasure to
others.' That's also a kind of slogan of his. He's always trying to prove
he's not what he seems to be. For example, he thinks of himself as a
great lady's man. He carries a worn picture around in his wallet. 'My
passion, 1926' written on it--a publicity still? Who knows. . ."
In the bow compartment. The new control-room assistant inquires
cautiously what the Commander is like. Someone fills him in. "The Old
Man? He's an odd one. I'm always amazed how happy he is when we put to
sea. It seems he's got himself engaged to one of those Nazi bitches. You
can't find out much about her. Flyer's widow. Looks like she's trying out
the services one by one: first the Air Force, now the Navy. In any case,
the Old Man isn't getting much out of it. Must be one of those stuck-up
types. That's about all you can make out from the photo_long legs, decent
enough front-- sure! But he deserves something better."
"They say those Nazi bitches aren't so bad." Schwalle.
"What makes you think so?"
"They get all kinds of special instruction at the Reich School for
Brides. For example, they have to hold a piece of chalk in their assholes
and write 'otto-otto-otto' on a blackboard. Makes them supple."
General uproar.
Several times in the course of a day through the open door of the
radio shack I catch a passing glimpse of Herrmann, the sound man, who
relieves Hinrich at the radio. He has a complicated way of squeezing
himself between the table tops where his instruments stand. There's
almost always a book in his hands. He's twisted his headset so that only
one earpiece is in place. This way he can hear incoming Morse signals and
still have an ear free for orders.
Herrmann has been on board since the commissioning of the boat. His
bunk is in the petty officers' quarters opposite mine. His father, as I
learned from the Commander, was a deck officer on a cruiser, and went
down in 1917.
"The boy has had an absolutely typical career. First business
school, then the Navy. In 1935 he was sound man on the cruiser _Köln_,
then on a torpedo boat, then submarine school, and after that the
Norwegian expedition with me. He's earned his Iron Cross First Class a
couple of times. He's due for the fried egg soon."
Herrmann is a quiet, strikingly pale man. Like the Chief, he moves
easily through the boat, as though there were no obstacles in his path.
I've never seen his face relaxed--it's always tense, giving him a
somewhat animal look. His behavior is timid and withdrawn. He keeps
himself apart, even among the petty officers. He and Ensign Ullmann are
the only ones who never play cards; they prefer to read.
I bend over Herrmann's table and from the earpiece of his headset
hear thin sounds like the soft chirping of crickets. Not one of us--not 
even Herrmann--knows whether the message being transmitted at this exact
instant, hundreds or thousands of miles away, has anything to do with us.
Herrmann looks up, his eyes alert. He hands out a sheet of paper
with a meaningless sequence of letters on it. The Second Watch Officer
takes it and quickly gets to work deciphering it.
After a few minutes he has the clear text: "To Commander-inChief Uboats: Out of a convoy, two steamers five thousand and six thousand
registered tons--seven hours depth charge pursuit-- driven off--am
pursuing--UW."
The Second Watch Officer enters this message in the radio logbook
and gives the book to the Commander. The Commander signs the message and
hands the book on. The First Watch Officer reads it and initials it as
well. Finally the Second Watch Officer hands it back to Herrmann, whose
arm is already stretched out of the shack ready to receive it.
A typical message, relating in the meagerest detail the story of an
attack: success, narrow escape after seven hours of underwater
bombardment, and pursuit despite enemy defense.
"Eleven thousand gross registered tons--not so bad. UW--that's
Bischof," says the Old Man. "Pretty soon he'll have a sore neck from all
those decorations."
Not a word about the seven hours of depth charges. The Old Man acts
as though the radiogram had never mentioned them.
Some minutes later Herrmann hands out the book again. This time
it's a signal from the Commander-in-Chief to a boat stationed in the far
north: to proceed at full speed to another attack area. Apparently a
convoy is thought to be in the region in question. Invisible threads of
radio are now drawing the other boat to a specific point in the Atlantic,
the boat under remote control, thousands of miles from the Commander-inChief and his broadcasting station. The hunt is being taken up out of
sight of the enemy. On the huge map in the C-in-C's Headquarters someone
is moving a small red flag to indicate the boat's new position.
There are intervals of calm during the daily trial dives, and these
are used for inspecting the torpedoes.
The bow compartment is transformed into a machine shop. The
hammocks are stowed away and the berths snapped shut. The seamen discard
their shirts. Block and tackle are secured to the loading carriage. The
floor breach of torpedo tube number one is opened. The first fish--fat,
heavily greased, and dully gleaming--is drawn partway out of its tube,
its weight borne by the hoist rings. At the command of the torpedo
mechanic, everyone hauls on the horizontal hawser as if in a tug-of-war.
Slowly the half-exposed torpedo emerges from its tube to hang free on the
loading carriage, where, despite its full weight of 1 1/2 tons, it can
easily be moved forward, backward, or to either side.
Each man has his own special assignment. One tests the motor,
another the bearings and axles. Special pipes are attached and the
compressed-air tanks filled, rudder and hydroplane controls tested, the
lubrication points filled with oil. Then, after much shouting and
shoving, the fish is finally pushed back into the tube.
The same procedure goes for the second torpedo. The crew seems to
have hit its stride. "Come on, out of the lady," roars Dunlop. "This is
no damn good at all. There're people standing in line outside and the man
simply won't budge. Damn pimps--not one of you is willing to work."
Finally the floor breaches are sealed again, the tackle knocked off
the loading carriages, the carriages removed, and the tackle stowed away.
The bunks can be pulled down again. Gradually the room is transformed
back into a cave dwelling. The bow-compartment crew is exhausted; the men
crouch on the floor plates that hide the second load of torpedoes.
"It's about time these beasts did a little hunting," Ario
complains.
No one has to give a thought to the 8.8 shells. The highly
sensitive torpedoes, however, require constant attention. They're quite
different from shells--more like little ships with an extremely complex
technology. In addition to the usual rudders they also have hydroplanes.
Essentially they're self-sufficient miniature U-boats loaded with a cargo
of 8oo pounds of TNT.
In the old days people used to talk about "launching" torpedoes,--
not about firing them--which is much more to the point. We simply give
them a push out of their tubes and direct them on their way. After that
they run on their own power--compressed air or electricity--and follow a
predetermined course.
Four of the fourteen torpedoes are in the bow tubes, one in the
stern: G7A's, motor-driven, with compressed-air tanks. Two are for
concussion explosion, three for remote-control explosion. On contact with
a steamer the percussion caps detonate the load of explosives and tear
holes in the sides of the vessel. The more complicated and therefore more
sensitive remote-control detonators, which are activated magnetically,
explode at the appropriate depth just as the torpedo is passing under the
ship. This detonation causes a pressure wave that strikes the vessel at
its structurally weakest point.
The days pass in constant alternation of watch and off-watch, the
same routine that governs every ship afloat.
The first watch is obviously the one that worries the Old Man. The
First Watch Officer seems conscientious enough, but he can't fool the
Commander, who thinks he's too lazy.
I am to take the place of one of the guards on the second bridge
watch who is apparently down with flu. That means night watch from four
to eight ship's time.
It's three o'clock when I wake up, half an hour too early. Silence
in the control room. The bulbs have been shaded. Again I have the
impression that the room stretches away into infinity.
The control-room mate reports on the weather. "Not much water
coming over, but cold!" That means my woolen scarf and thick sweater, and
perhaps even my woolen executioner's hood over the sou'wester. I get my
things together.
The other bridge guards turn up: the Berliner and the ensign.
"Pretty damn cold," the bosun's mate mutters finally. "The second
watch is always the shittiest!" Then louder, "Five minutes till time!"
At this moment the Second Watch Officer comes through the circular
hatch, so bundled up that almost nothing of his face is visible between
his sou'wester and the edge of his collar.
"Morning, men!"
"Morning, Lieutenant!"
The Second Watch Officer pretends he can't wait to go. He's the
first to climb up and out. It's a tradition to spare the retiring watch
the last five minutes.
The First Watch Officer, whom we're relieving, announces the course
and speed.
I have the starboard sector aft. My eyes quickly adjust to the
darkness. The sky is a little brighter than the black sea, so the horizon
is clearly defined. The air is very damp. The binoculars quickly cloud
over.
"Leather cloths to the bridge!" the Second Watch Officer shouts
below. But it isn't long before the wipers are saturated too, and they
begin to smear. Soon my eyes are burning and I have to shut them for
seconds at a time. No one says a word. The pounding of the engines and
the hissing and roaring of the waves quickly merge into the general
silence. Now and again someone bumps his knee against the tower wall,
producing a dull boom.
The port lookout astern gives a sigh and the Second Watch Officer
whirls around. "Pay attention. Keep your eyes skinned!"
I feel an itching on my neck, but I'm wrapped up like a mummy.
Can't scratch properly. Even monkeys can do that much! But I don't dare
fumble around with my clothing. The Second Watch Officer gets uneasy if
you undo so much as a single button.
He comes from a suburb of Hamburg. Was supposed to go to college
but gave it up. Studied banking instead. After that he enlisted in the
Navy. That's all I know about him. He's always cheerful, well thought of
by commanders, petty officers, and seamen alike; no stickler for rules,
does his job with relaxed matter-of-factness and no fuss. Although this
shows that his ideas of duty are very different from those of the First
Watch Officer, he's still the only person who manages to stay on halfway
decent terms with the latter.
The wake is phosphorescent. The night sky black. Black with diamond
embroidery. The stars stand out brilliantly in the heavens. The moon is
dull, its light pale and bleached and tinged with green. It looks
spoiled--like a rotting melon. Visibility over the water is very bad.
Clouds move in front of the moon. The horizon has almost
disappeared. What's that--Shadows P--Announce them?--Or wait?-- Goddam
strange clouds! I stare until my eyes water, until I feel certain that
it's nothing, no shadows.
I sniff hard to clear my nose so that I can smell things more
easily. Many a convoy has been caught in pitch darkness by the
farreaching scent of smoke or escaping fuel oil from a damaged steamer.
"Black as a bear's bottom," complains the Second Watch Officer. "We
could run straight into a Tommy!" We don't need to be on the lookout for
lights. The Tommies are extremely careful not to show any. Even the
glimmer of a cigarette could spell destruction.
The Zeiss binoculars are heavy. My arms begin to fail. The triceps
ache. Always the same routine: let the glasses hang for a moment on their
strap, stretch and wave your arms around. Then up with the heavy glasses
again, press the eyepieces against your browbones, support the binoculars
on your fingertips to cushion them against the vibration of the boat. And
constantly scan the ninety degrees of horizon and sea for signs of the
enemy. Move the glasses very, very slowly from one side of the sector to
the other, feel out the horizon inch by inch, then put the glasses down 
and scan the whole sector in a single glance, then back to the horizon
from left to right, inch by inch.
Now and again the wind whips spray over us. The forward lookouts
bend down stiffly to shield the lenses with their hands and the upper
part of theiT bodies. When thick clouds move across the moon, the water
is stained black.
I know that the Atlantic here is at least ten thousand feet deep--
ten thousand feet of water under our keel--but we might as well be
gliding with idling engines across a solid surface.
Time drags. Growing temptation to let one's eyelids close and
surrender to the motion of the boat, to enjoy being cradled up and down,
lulled to sleep.
I'm tempted to ask the Second Watch Officer for the time but decide
against it. In the east a trace of pale, reddish light shows above the
horizon. The soft, bleached glow only colors a thin band of sky because a
drift of blue-black clouds lies low over the horizon. A long time passes
before the light makes its way up behind them, setting their edges
aflame. The foreship is now recognizable as a dark mass.
It takes a while before there is enough light for me to be able to
make out the individual gratings on the upper deck. Gradually the men's
faces become clear: weary, gray.
One of the crew comes up to have a pee. He directs his face into
the wind and pisses leeward through the railing of the "greenhouse." I
hear the stream spatter on the deck below. Smell of urine.
Again the question: "Permission to come on deck?" One after another
they emerge for a breath of air and a quick pee. The scent of cigarette
smoke, fragments of conversation.
"All we need is for them to sell rubbers, and the ship's store
would be perfect."
A little later the Second Watch Officer reports. The Commander has
appeared on the bridge--he must have come up very silently. A quick side
glance and I see his face, red in the glimmer of his cigarette, but then
I call myself to order. Don't listen, don't let yourself be distracted,
don't move. Don't remove your eyes from your sector. You have only one
duty: to peer until your eyes come right out of their sockets.
"Tubes one to four--torpedo doors open!"
So the Old Man is going to have another firing-control exercise.
Without turning my head I hear the First Watch Officer give the angle of
aim. Then the report from below: "Torpedo doors one to four open!" Again
and again the First Watch Officer repeats his monotonous incantation. But
from the Old Man not a sound.
The horizon grows sharper. In the east the light has spread out
along it; soon it will have encircled the skyline completely. Red fire
now glows in the slit between the horizon and the blue-black clouds. The
wind freshens, and suddenly in the east the gleaming upper portion of the
sun appears. Soon snakes of fiery red are darting and twisting across the
water. I have only a brief glimpse of the sun and the color of the sky,
for the lighting is made to order for enemy flyers. Bright enough to
reveal the boat and its foaming wake, but still too dark for us to spot
airplanes quickly against the background of the sky.
Goddam gulls! They're harder than anything else on the nerves. It
would be nice to know how many alarms have been sounded on their account.
I'm profoundly grateful that I don't have the sunlit sector.
The First Watch Officer goes on issuing commands. "Tubes one to
three--ready--one and three tubes fire--distance twelve hundred--width of
spread two hundred fifty--angle?"
"Angle ninety," comes from below.
The ocean is now fully awake. The short waves flash with the first
light. Our bow begins to glitter. In rapid succession the sky now becomes
red-yellow, yellow, then blue-green. The exhaust gas from the diesels
extends its bluish veil to a few clouds of pink tulle. Our wake throws up
myriad sparks of sunlight. The next man turns his face toward me, flooded
with the red light of dawn.
Far off amid the waves I suddenly discover a few dark points . . .
and then they're gone. What were they? The port lookout has seen them
too.
"Porpoises!"
They approach like badly trimmed torpedoes, shooting first through
the water, then through the air. One of the school has noticed the boat
and they come flying toward us as though on signal. Soon we have them
abeam on both sides. There must be dozens of them. Their bellies shimmer
bright green; their dorsal fins cut the water like the prows of ships.
Effortlessly they keep pace. This isn't swimming, but a constant flowing
succession of leaps and bounds. The water seems to offer them no
resistance. I have to remind myself not to watch them, but to pay
attention to my sector.
Short gusts of wind ruffle the waves. Gradually the sky clouds
over. Light trickles down and seems to be reaching us through a gigantic
horizontal pane of milk glass. Soon our faces are dripping with flying
spray. The motions of the boat increase.
The porpoises abruptly abandon us.
As I go off-watch my eyes seem to be swollen out of their sockets,
at the end of tentacles. I press them with the palms of my hands and have
the feeling that they actually are allowing themselves to be pushed back
into place.
I'm so stiff that I can scarcely move as I peel off my wet oilskins
and clamber exhausted into my bunk.
Still half an hour until change of watch. For the thousandth time I
concentrate on the pattern of veins in the woodwork beside the bunk:
nature's indecipherable hieroglyphics. The lines around a knot look like
the airstream around the lifting surface of a plane.
Sudden jarring of the alarm bell.
I'm out of my bunk and reeling on the floor before I'm really
conscious. The navigator has the third watch. What in the world can have
happened?
As I try to get into my boots I'm caught in a crowd. The whole room
is suddenly full of frantic commotion. Blue smoke billowing out of the
kitchen. Looming through it the face of one of the stokers. With forced
indifference he asks what's up.
"Whatever's not tied down, you dumb pig!"
The boat is still on an even keel. What does it mean? An alarm--
and we're still horizontal?
"Belay alarm! Belay alarm!" rings out from the loudspeakers, and
finally the report comes from the control room: "False alarm!"
"What?"
"Helmsman hit the alarm bell by mistake!"
"What a shit!"
"Which goddam asshole was it?"
"Markus!"
Speechlessness for a while, then general rage.
"I could kick that swine overboard."
"Fucking shit!"
"What a beat-up asshole!"
"That's what my girl says too. . ."
"Shut your trap!"
"They ought to use your ass for a fender."
"Between cruisers if possible!"
I smell a real fight.
The navigator is beside himself. He doesn't say a word, but his
eyes are blazing.
Lucky for the helmsman that he's sitting in the tower. Even the
Chief looks ready to tear him limb from limb if he ever gets his hands on
him.
Politics is taboo in the Officers' Mess. Even if I touch on
political matters when talking privately with him, the Old Man instantly
puts an end to any serious conversation with a mocking twist of the lips.
Questions about the meaning of the war and our chances are absolutely
out. At the same time there's no doubt that when the Old Man takes to
brooding all day long, staring at nothing, it's the political questions
that bother him, not his personal problems.
He's good at camouflage. Only occasionally does he open a small
crack in his visor, venture a cryptic remark, and for a few instants
betray his real opinion.
Especially when enraged--the radio news almost always puts him in a
fury--he reveals his hatred of Nazi propaganda. "Bleeding the enemy of
shipping capacity, they call it! Destruction of tonnage. Heinies!
Tonnage! It's good ships they're talking about. Fucking propaganda--turns
us into official executioners, wreckers, slaughterers . . ."
The cargoes of the sunken ships, which are usually much more
valuable to the enemy than the actual ships, hardly interest him at all.
His heart is with the ships themselves. For him they're living things
with pulsing hearts of machinery. It is abominable to have to destroy
them.
I often wonder how he can possibly come to terms with this
inescapable inner conflict. Apparently he has reduced all problems to a
single common denominator: Attack so as not to be destroyed. "Submit to
the inevitable" seems to be his motto. But he will have nothing to do
with the rhetoric.
Sometimes I feel compelled to coax him out of his reserve, to ask
him whether perhaps he isn't playing a game like all the others, though
in a more complicated fashion than most; whether it doesn't require an
infinite capacity for self-delusion to be able to live with the
conviction that all doubts are silenced by the concept of duty. But he 
neatly evades me every time. Most of what I learn comes from his dislikes
and antipathies.
Again and again it is the First Watch Officer or the new engineer
who annoys the Old Man.
Even the way the First Watch Officer sits down so precisely
irritates him. And there's his demonstrative cleanliness. And his table
manners. He handles a knife and fork like dissecting instruments. Every
canned sardine is subjected to a formal post-mortem. First he excises the
ribs and backbone with the utmost care, then goes to work to remove the
skin. Not the slightest scrap is allowed to escape him. By this time the
Old Man is beginning to glower.
In addition to the canned sardines there is a kind of dried sausage
with an especially thin skin that simply cannot be peeled off. This is a
favorite object for the First Watch Officer's dissections. He captures
the skin in tiny slivers; in the deep folds it can't be loosened at all.
Everyone else devours the sausages skin and all. Although he fiddles
about, naturally he can't get it off. He finally cuts so much of the
sausage away from around the skin that there's almost nothing left. The
Old Man can contain himself no longer. "Perfect ornament for the garbage
pail!" But even this is too subtle--the First Watch Officer doesn't get
it. He simply looks up expressionlessly and goes on scraping and cutting.
The new engineer obviously doesn't go down any better. What
disturbs the Old Man most about him seems to be his vulgar way of
grinning and his arrogance. "Second Engineer isn't up to much, is he?" he
recently inquired of the Chief. The Chief merely rolled his eyes and
wobbled his head back and forth like a mechanical dummy in a store
window--a gesture he'd picked up from the Old Man.
"Come on, spit it out!"
"Hard to tell! A Nordic type, as they say."
"But a very damn slow Nordic type. Just the man we need for Chief
Engineer! Down to a 'T'!" And after a while, "All I want to know is how
we're going to get rid of him."
At that moment the Second Engineer turns up. I study him carefully:
chunky, blue-eyed, the perfect model for textbooks. All hair cream and
indolence, he's the exact opposite of the Chief.
Because he doesn't feel welcome in our mess, the Second Engineer
tends to seek out the petty officers. The Commander disapproves of such
crossing of lines and glowers at him out of the corner of his eye
whenever he disappears into the petty officers' mess. Not being very
perceptive, the Second Engineer is quite unaware of this, but perches on
the sofa when there's room and babbles away to the petty officers about
this and that. No wonder the atmosphere is less than congenial when the
First Watch Officer and Second Engineer eat with us.
Conversations remain entirely neutral. Thorny subjects are avoided,
but occasionally the Old Man gets out of control. One day at breakfast he
said, "The gentlemen in Berlin seem to be working full steam ahead to
invent new epithets for Herr Churchill. What's he called in today's
official notices?" The Old Man glowers. No answer from the circle, so he
answers his own question. "Sot, drunkard, paralytic . . . I must say that
for a drunken paralytic, he's giving us one helluva time."
The First Watch Officer sits bolt upright and looks mulish. The
world is suddenly incomprehensible to him. The Chief, in his usual
position with his hands clasped around his knees, stares at a spot
between the plates as though it contained some remarkable revelation.
Silence.
The Old Man won't let himself be put off.
"What we need is some music--perhaps our Hitler Youth leader would
be kind enough to put a record on."
Though no one looks at the First Watch Officer, he feels the remark
is meant for him and leaps to his feet, bright-red in the face. The Old
Man thunders after him, "'Tipperary,' if you please."
As the First Watch Officer returns and the opening bars start
blaring through the boat, the Old Man needles him. "The record won't
undermine the foundations of your philosophy, First Watch Officer, will
it?" Then he solemnly raises his forefinger and announces to the table:
"_His_ Master's voice--not ours!"
In the bow compartment, close to the door, I sit on the floor
plates, with my knees drawn up. It's the only possible way to sit in
there, torpedoes underneath, and my back against the wall of the
Quarters.
Conversation flows freely. Nothing like the constrained atmosphere
in the Officers' Mess. The leaders in the bow compartment are always the
same--Ario and Turbo along with Dunlop and Hacker. Some of the less
articulate men withdraw from the arguments--leaving the others to talk
and show off to one another--and creep into their bunks and hammocks like
nocturnal animals into their burrows.
"Once a whore pissed all over my back," a voice comes from a
hammock high up. "Man, that was a sensation!"
"You slob!"
"Sensations! I'll give you sensations!" Ario asserts. "On our
steamer we had a character who always said, 'Get a cork with a nail in it
and a violin string attached, push the cork up your ass and then have
someone fiddle a tune on the string'!"
"You can't get much more complicated than that, can you?"
"They say it gives you an amazing buzzing in the ass," Ario
insists.
Now I hear fragments from way ahead in the bow. "Emma still doesn't
know who knocked her up."
"How so?"
"How so? Christ, are you that dumb? Just try holding your bare ass
against a circular saw and then say which tooth cut you first!"
Uproar.
For the first time I see the chief mechanic Johann on the bridge.
Here in the bright light he looks twice as bleached and emaciated as he
did down there in the electric light of the engine room. Although he's
only just got here, he's already shivering as if he belongs in bed.
"Not used to fresh air, Johann?" I ask. Instead of answering, he
stares grimly over the bulwark with something like disgust. The sight of
the sea obviously makes him uneasy. I've never seen him so sour before.
He usually seems cheerful, but that's because he's looking at pipes and
manometers. The silvery gleaming floor plates of the E-room are the true
foundation of life for him, the fine smell of oil a balm for his lungs.
But up here--nature in the raw--the hell with it! A disgusted sweeping
glance makes clear that no doubt the sight of the sea may be all very 
well for primitive creatures like sailors, but not for specialists who
are on intimate terms with highly complicated machinery. His face set,
Johann disappears below in silence.
"Now he's pouring out his woes to his machines--all about the
wicked, wicked sea," the Second Watch Officer says. "Funny heinies, these
machinists. Fresh air seems to damage their delicate lungs, daylight
screws up their retinas, and seawater is pure hydrochloric acid."
"It's not like that with the Chief," I remark.
The Second Watch Officer is neverat a loss for a quick answer.
"He's simply perverse!"
For me, visits to the bridge are pure salvation.
Luckily two men are allowed topside in addition to the guards. I
take advantage of this as often as possible. The moment I stick my head
through the tower hatch, I feel liberated. I climb out of the mechanical
cage, out of confining walls, out of the stench and dampness into the
light and the pure air.
First I search the sky for weather signs, then give a quick
sweeping glance around the horizon. Then I turn my head to and fro and
finally tilt it all the way back. Through a few holes in the clouds I
look out into space. Nothing to distort my view of the heavens--a huge
kaleidoscope that offers a constant succession of images with every hour
that goes by. I watch the panorama of the sky as it changes: now, for
example, it's deep-blue high overhead. All the holes in the rapidly
moving cloud cover are filled with deeper blues. Only toward the horizon
is the cover torn. Here the blue is thinner, washed out by the drifting
water vapors. To the east a touch of red still hangs above the horizon;
in it floats a single dark violet-blue cloud.
Presently, something marvelous occurs behind the boat. Halfway up
the vault of sky a moist patch of steel-blue light spreads until it
blends with a flood of pale ochre, rising from behind the horizon. At
first the fringes take on a soiled, greenish tone, but then they are
slowly shot through from behind by a dull, luminous blue with the merest
shimmer of green remaining: Verona blue.
At noon the sky becomes filled with cool silvery-gray. The piles of
cloud have disappeared and only a few silky cirrus clouds veil the sun,
scattering its light in silvery glints and flashes. A quiet pastoral
scene unfolds, drawn in nacreous, subtle tints--like the inside of an
oyster shell.
In the afternoon, to starboard, yellow and orange bands shimmer
behind dark blue clouds. Their color is rich, heavy, almost oily. The
clouds surge upward as though from a prairie fire: an African sky. I
picture table mountains, giraffe acacias, gnus, and antelopes.
Far off to port beside a pile of dirty woolen clouds a rainbow
rises in the sky. A second, paler one arches over it. In the middle of
this semi-circle floats a dark ball like an explosion of shrapnel.
In late afternoon the stage sets above me change completely. The
alterations are not achieved by drawing a few curtains or changing the
shades of color; instead, a magnificent procession of clouds arrives,
quickly filling the heavens.
As though the pattern of forms were not striking enough, the sun
breaks through a rift, shooting oblique spears of light into the tumult
of clouds.
After the evening meal I climb up to the bridge again. The day is
dying, dissolving. The only color left is dabbed here and there on the 
clouds that float in the western sky, lined up like beads on an abacus.
Soon only a small fleecy cloud retaining the last of the light is there
to hold the eye. The glow of the setting sun lingers a while above the
horizon, but then that too grows cold. Now the day is finished. In the
east, night has already come. The water is transformed under the violet
shadows. Its murmuring grows louder. Like the breathing of a sleeping
man, the waves sweep by beneath the boat.
I am always awakened at midnight by the change of watch in the
engine room. Both watches have to pass through the petty officers' mess.
For a while both doors to the diesel room stand open. The roaring fills
the room and the engines suck in great drafts of air, making the curtain
of my bunk billow up. One of the men coming off-duty forces his way past
the unfolded table, pulling the curtain all the way back. It will be some
time now before peace is restored.
I keep my eyes shut and force myself not to hear the voices. But
another light is turned on. The glare of the bulb in the ceiling strikes
me straight in the face, and I'm fully awake. There's a strong smell of
diesel exhaust. The petty officers who have been relieved are pulling off
their oil-smeared jackets and trousers, taking a few drags of apple juice
from their bottles, and climbing into their bunks, chatting in subdued
voices.
"Big fancy to-do." I hear Kleinschmidt. "Coffee at my future
inlaws, with vases of flowers and gold-trimmed dishes. Very nice people.
The old man's sixty-five and she's already seventy. Pound cakes and plum
cakes. Before that, black currant liqueur, homemade--all first class. My
fiancée was in the kitchen making the coffee. I was sitting there on the
sofa--with my arms sort of spread out, and I happened to push my right
hand down into the crack between the seat and the upholstery at the back-
-you know?"
"Of course, then what?"
"Guess what I fish out?"
"How the hell would I know?" That must be the control-room mate
Isenberg. "Don't overdo the suspense."
"Well, a five-pack of condoms. Three still in it. Two missing. What
d'you say to that?"
"You're great at arithmetic!"
"So I slammed the package down on the table. The old folks were
gaping at me. Then I walked out--end of dream!"
"You're crazy!"
"What d'you mean? Maybe you think I should have invited my Herr
Cunt of a brother-in-law to join us for coffee, eh?"
"Take it easy."
"Either--or! There's no third way as far as I'm concerned!"
"You're a nut case! What makes you so sure she really. . ."
"Oh come on, don't talk crap. Do you want me to believe the old man
needed them?"
I turn over again toward the plywood wall but the door is thrown
open with a bang and the last man appears, bosun's mate Wichmann. He
slams the door shut behind him and turns on a second bright light. I
already know from other nights what will happen next. But some damn
curiosity makes me watch again.
Wichmann strikes a pose in front of the mirror on the door and
makes faces at himself. Before bringing his hair forward over his face he
runs his thumbnail a couple of times in both directions over the teeth of
the comb. After a series of attempts he succeeds in getting the part
exactly right. When he takes a few steps back, I can see that his face is
shining in an ecstasy of concentration. Now comes the moment when he
inspects himself from left to right, his head cocked on one side. Then he
goes to his locker and rummages about. When he reappears in front of the
mirror he has the tube in his hand. He carefully applies the pomade
between the teeth of the comb, then draws it through his hair again and
again until he achieves a completely flat surface that's like a mirror.
Finally he packs away his utensils, takes off his jacket, removes
his shoes without unlacing them, and rolls into bed, leaving the light
on.
Five minutes later I climb down to turn it off. In passing I glance
at the bosun's mate's bunk: the splendor is destroyed.
_Friday. Fourteenth Day at Sea._ I meet the Old Man in the control
room. Affable. Apparently happy to have a conversation. This time I make
a start by asking his explanation of why so many men volunteer for U-boat
service despite the heavy losses.
The usual minutes for reflection. Then, with pauses: "You won't get
much out of the children themselves. Obviously they're tempted by the
aura. We're what you might call the _crème de la crème_, the Dönitz
Volunteer Corps. And then, of course, there's the propaganda . . ."
Long pause. The Old Man keeps staring at the floor plates. Finally
he's ready to talk again. "Perhaps they simply can't imagine what's ahead
of them. After all, they're nothing but blank pages-- three years'
schooling, then drafted immediately, and the usual training. They haven't
seen anything yet--nor experienced anything--and, besides, they have no
imagination."
A ghost of a grin spreads across his face as he turns halfway
toward me. "Footsiogging around with a gun over your shoulder-- can't say
I'd find it exactly inspiring either. How would you like to go plowing
through the countryside in jackboots? God knows, we're better off in that
respect. They give us a ride. We don't have to drag ourselves along
getting blisters on our feet. Regular meals-- mostly hot food. Where else
can you find that? Besides, we have real bunks. And excellent heating.
And lots of good invigorating sea air . . . And then shore leaves, with
stylish marine uniforms and all the pretty decorations. If you ask me,
we're better off than the ordinary troops: certainly a U-boat crew is way
ahead of the Navy shit-shovelers. Everything's relative, after all."
At the word "shit-shovelers" I see myself practicing "individual
review with salutation." The division commander roars the order at the
top of his voice. Each roar lerks him up on tiptoe. "Kindly get your
goddam rifle up faster or I'll have the piss streaming out of your nose
and ears before I've finished with you!"
And before that, labor service . . . August Ritter von Karavec was
the name of the bastard they assigned to us as chief instructor after he
had been transferred several times for disciplinary reasons. "When
properly commanded, a division should be distinguishable from the terrain
by nothing but the whites of their eyes" was his basic principle. By
putting us through wheeling maneuvers and parade march in a bog, he could 
get us plastered from head to foot with ice-cold mud in five minutes
flat; there wasn't a boot left on anyone's foot--they were stuck in the
slime, and we were soaked to the skin. Two hours later this madman had
uniform inspection and found something in everyone to bellyache about.
Which meant: Dump all belongings in a single heap in the middle of the
room, and then let twenty men sort out their possessions again. As
"punishment" there was also the great wheeling maneuver performed on a
slope. This was even worse than the bog, because the men on the wings
almost burst their lungs racing uphill. And that bastard made sure that
everyone had to take his turn on the outside...
The cynical grin was gone from the Old Man's face before he picked
up from where he'd left off.
"Perhaps you can only do this kind of thing with kids, because
they're still what you might call underexposed. No ties. The one person
to make it out of a tight spot is almost always an officer. With a wife
and children at home! Funny thing. Once we were picking up seamen from a
sunken destroyer----one of ours--pulled them out of the drink. We must
have got there something like two hours after she sank, which is pretty
soon as these things go. It was summer, so the water wasn't too cold. But
most of the young ones were hanging in their life preservers--already
drowned. They'd simply given up-- let their necks go limp, although there
was only a medium to heavy sea. Only the older ones struggled. There was
one of them--over forty and seriously wounded--and _he_ survived even
though he'd lost a lot of blood. But the eighteen-year-olds who were
completely uninjured--they didn't." The Old Man is silent for a few
moments, apparently searching for the best words to sum it all up. Then:
"The older ones generally get through--the kids would rather give up."
The Chief has arrived, and glances at me for a moment in
astonishment. The Commander goes on.
"Actually we ought to be able to get along with a lot fewer men. I
keep imagining a boat that would only need a crew of two or three.
Exactly like an airplane. Basically we have all these men on board
because the designers have failed to do a proper job. Most of the men are
nothing but links in a chain. They fill the gaps the designers have left
in the machinery. People who open and close valves or throw switches are
not what you'd call fighting men. I can't listen these days when the Cin-C U-boats tries to get everyone all excited with his advertising
slogans: 'Attack--Defeat--Des troy'--it's all pure bulishit. Who does the
attacking? The Commander and no one else. The seamen don't see so much as
a trace of the enemy."
The Old Man pauses. No need to say anything now. No prompting
necessary today.
"Damn shame old Dönitz has joined the bigmouths. We swore by him at
first," he says in a low voice.
I've known for some time what's been eating the Old Man. His
relations with the Commander-in-Chief have not been good since his last
report.
"We used to see him as a kind of sea Moltke. But now it's 'One for
all, all for one'--'One Reich, one Volk, one Fiihrer'--'The Führer has
his eye on you'--'The Führer, the Führer, the Führer'. . . You can hardly
bear to listen. Always stuck in the same groove. And then he keeps going
on about the 'German woman, our noblest possession.' 'When I leave the
Führer I always feel a mere nothing.' That sort of thing's enough to
floor anyone."
The Old Man has talked himself into real bitterness.
The Chief stares straight ahead and pretends he's heard nothing.
"Tsch, the volunteer crews!" The Old Man is back where he started.
"Comradeship--the togetherness of all men aboard--'sworn fellowship'--
_that's_ not just hot air, as a matter of fact. It really attracts
people. And more than anything else so does the feeling of belonging to
an elite. You only have to look at the fellows on leave. They swell up
like pouter pigeons with their U-boat insignia on their uniforms. Seems
to have some effect on the ladies too. . ."
The loudspeaker crackles. Then: "Second watch stand by!" This time
the order applies to me too. I'm going to stand one watch as stoker,
attending the exhaust doors and the diesels.
The Chief has given me cotton for my ears. "Six hours of diesel
noise is quite enough, I can tell you."
The suction of the machines holds the diesel room door so tight
that I need all my strength to open it. Immediately the noise of the
engines breaks over me like a hail of blows. The staccato chatter of the
push rods and rocker arms forms the percussion accompaniment to the
contained torrent of explosions within the cylinders and the deep
thundering roar issuing, I assume, from the blower. However, only the
starboard diesel is running, at half speed, while charging batteries; the
port engine is silent. So the deep roar can't be the blower after all,
since it's only used to increase the air supply when the machines are
running at full speed.
The diesels reach almost to the rounded ceiling. Along the flank of
the starboard engine the links between the rocker arms and push rods move
in perfect unison, sending out wave after wave of vibrations over the
huge machine.
The chief mechanic Johann is on duty. For the time being he pays no
attention to me. He's concentrating on the behavior of the tachometer;
its needle is moving sharply. All of a sudden it will jump several marks
on the scale and shiver nervously as our screws meet varying resistance
in the rough sea. Even without the tachometer, I would be more aware here
in the after part of the ship than in the control room of how the waves
cling to the boat, then release it and hurl it forward again. The screws
labor at first, then the boat fights its way free, and they race all the
faster.
Johann checks the oil pressure and the cold-water pressure, one
after the other, then with the abstracted look of a lab worker he reaches
for the fuel oil line, which branches off under the lubricating pumps,
and tests its temperature. Finally he mounts the silvery, gleaming step
that runs along the side of the diesel and touches the rising and falling
rocker-arm hinges: all with very slow, precisely calculated movements.
He shouts my instructions at me: see to it that nothing gets too
hot, keep feeling the cold-water pipes and inspecting the rocker arms on
the push rods, the way he's just done it. And if he gives the sign, shut
the exhaust gas doors. I've watched this procedure often enough.
Johann returns to the control station, cleans his hands with
brightly colored cotton waste, reaches into a chest beside his small
standing table for a bottle of juice, and tilts his head back to take a
couple of deep gulps.
The vibrating joints drip with oil. I feel them one after the
other, absorbing the heavy impact through my hand. All of them are
uniformly warm. The explosions in the cylinders follow one another in
uninterrupted sequences. I repeat to myself: intake stroke, compression
stroke, power stroke, exhaust stroke.
After a quarter of an hour Johann opens the door to the galley and
turns a hand wheel on the ceiling. At the same time he roars an
explanation. "I'm closing--the--bottom valve of the diesel--now it's--
drawing air--from inside the boat--gives a fine--through draft!"
An hour later the chief mechanic leaves the control station and
comes along the gangway between the two engine blocks. One after another,
he opens the inspection petcocks on the side of the diesel that's in use.
Each belches a stream of fire. Johann nods, reassured: ignition in all
cylinders, everything in perfect running order. Funny, I think to myself,
smoking is forbidden, but this flame-throwing is all right.
Swaying like a tightrope walker, Johann makes his way back again to
the control station--rubbing a few oil flecks from a polished surface in
passing--and cleans his hands again with a handful of cotton waste. The
waste is tucked between the pipes near the door. After a while he reaches
over his head and turns on a high-pressure valve to increase the flow of
fuel oil. Then he glances at the electrical telethermometer, which
registers the temperature in all the cylinders and the combined exhaust
pipes. Using a pencil stub so short that he has to hold it with the tips
of his fingers, he makes his entries in the engine-room log: consumption
of oil, temperatures, variations in pressure.
The helmsman, just off duty and both arms full of wet oilskins,
comes crashing through the door more by suction than his own momentum,
squeezes past me, and works his way aft along the support bars of the
diesel toward the E-motors, where he hangs the dripping clothes around
the stern torpedo tube to dry.
The diesel mate is sitting on a low tool chest opposite me in front
of the port diesel control station, poring over a battered book. His
machine is idle so he has nothing to do. He has to stay on duty, however,
because the machine may be called upon at any moment.
Again and again I sway along the polished iron runway on the side
of the starboard diesel. The gauges show normal pressure.
The chief mechanic signals to me: I am to sit in the doorway to the
E-room. The brown bags with the escape gear hang close to the door on
switchboxes. They are an oppressive reminder that the control room and
the bridge are a long way off. A long escape route to the tower hatch.
Not a pleasant post for someone with a lively imagination. You can tell
yourself a dozen times that it makes no difference whether the escape
route is long or short once the boat has been sent to the bottom. The
feeling of being shut up all the way in the stern eats away at your
nerves just the same.
Besides, the boat can just as easily be wrecked on the surface-- by
being rammed, for instance--and in that case everyone knows that the
guards on deck and the men in the control room may be rescued, but the
engine-room crew, never.
A bell shrills above the noise of the diesel. A red lamp goes on. A
stab of fear. The diesel mate is on his feet. What's up? Johann makes a
reassuring gesture. I understand: the port diesel has been ordered into
action. Now I have something to do: open the exhaust gas vents for the
port diesel. The diesel mate couples the engine to the driving shaft. 
Compressed air hisses into the cylinders. The chief mechanic has already
opened the fuel-oil throttle. Rockers click, and there is the crack of
the first explosion. The push rods begin to move: the port diesel is
roused from inactivity. Ignition of all cylinders, and already their
noise is blending in with the sound of the starboard engine. Another
stretch with nothing to do. The gauges show that the engines are getting
all they need: fuel, air, and water for the cooling system.
Three hours of the watch are over: halftime.
The air has become rapidly hotter and heavier since the port diesel
has been running.
At ten o'clock Cookie brings around a pail of lemonade. I drink
thirstily out of the ladle.
Johann jerks his thumbs up toward the ceiling: time to shut the
exhaust gas doors. We don't dare neglect them. They cover the exhaust
lines from the diesels while we are submerged, and they must be
absolutely watertight to prevent any flooding of the engines. When we're
traveling on the surface, however, there's incomplete combustion in the
engines. This leads to a buildup of carbon deposits and could prevent the
doors from shutting tight during a dive. At the beginning of the war, as
a matter of fact, boats were lost simply because the doors were jammed
open by the residue, and water rushed into the boat. To prevent this we
"grind in" the doors every four hours.
The red light flashes on again. The engine-room telegraph jumps to
half speed ahead. The chief mechanic pulls the throttle up. Less fuel is
reaching the cylinder pumps and the starboard diesel begins to turn more
slowly as the rhythm of the combustion falters. Johann puts the throttle
at zero and the diesel stops. He raises his fist, signaling me to close
the outer gas exhaust door by turning the big hand wheel on the ceiling.
I seize the spokes and turn with all my might, driving the exhaust-door
plate back and forth against its housing to scrape off all the carbon
deposits. Back and forth, back and forth, until Johann lets me stop.
Bathed in sweat and panting hard, I stand there as the starboard
diesel springs to life again. Shortly thereafter the port diesel is
stopped and the same procedure begins again. I now have no real strength
left and have to use every muscle to turn the spokes. Sweat is streaming
down my face.
The two diesels haven't been running long when the chief mechanic's
face goes tense. He listens to the pulse of the engines as if turned to
stone. Reaches for pocket flashlight and screwdriver and pushes his way
past me. Close to the after door he lifts a floor plate, shines his light
down, and beckons me closer. Underneath is an even wilder confusion of
pipes, filters, valves, and faucets, This is part of the water-cooling
and oil-lubrication system and the fuel supply.
Now I see it too: one of the pipes is releasing a fine spray of
water. Johann glances at me eloquently, then works his way between the
pipes, twisting like an acrobat, and is at the trouble spot with his
tools. After a while he hands me some nuts and bolts. He's removed a
packing from the pipe. I can't understand what he's roaring at me; he has
to raise his head from the tangle of pipes before I get it. The diesel
mate is to cut a new packing. Suddenly everyone has something to do. The
repair is not a simple one. A large black patch of sweat appears on
Johann's back. Finally he hauls himself out of the jungle, smeared with
oil, and winks--so whatever he did has worked. But how did he detect the
fault in the first place? He must have a sixth sense for his engines.
At five minutes to twelve the new watch comes in. One last mouthful
of apple juice, rub the hands with cotton waste, and then no thought but
to get out of this cave of an engine room and into the control room for
the first gulp of fresh air.
_Fifteenth Day at Sea._ Two weeks. The waves today are low. They
collide helter-skelter without any clear sense of over-all movement. The
boat rides them uneasily, unable to settle into any rhythm. An old
groundswell, which can be felt at long intervals under the choppy
surface, adds yet another variation to the motion.
For days we've seen nothing except one barrel, a few boxes, and,
once, hundreds of bottle corks--a sight that baffled even the Commander.
"Can't be left over from a binge--just corks and no bottles-- it's
crazy!"
I'm on watch with the navigator. My biceps at least are being kept
in training. I can feel every muscle in my upper arm all the way down
into my shoulder blades from holding up the heavy binoculars. I'm
lowering the glasses more often than I did in the first hour of the
watch. The navigator can hold his for hours at a time: you'd think he'd
been born with his arms fixed at right angles to his body.
"We lead what you might call a double life," he begins, out of
nowhere.
I don't know what he's getting at. The navigator is anything but
articulate, so his words emerge hesitantly from between his leather
gloves. "Half on board and half ashore, so to speak." He wants to say
something more but obviously can't find the right words.
We both busy ourselves with scanning our sectors.
"The way it is," the navigator finally resumes, "here we are,
dependent on ourselves--no mail, no communications, nothing. But we still
have a kind of link with home."
"Yes?"
"For example, there are things that bother you. You keep wondering
how things are going at home. And even more, how your folks are. They
don't even know where we really are, swanning around the way we do."
Another pause. Then, "When we put to sea"--he lets the sentence
dangle for a while--"we're already half gone. If something really happens
to the boat, it's months before they announce the loss."
Silence. Then he abruptly begins again. "If a man's married, it
makes him as good as useless." This uttered as a maxim beyond dispute.
Finally light dawns. He's talking about himself. But I pretend
we're still talking generalities.
"I don't know, Kriechbaum, whether wedding rings matter all that
much. . . How long is it the Chief has actually been married?"
"Only a couple of years. Stuck-up kind of lady--blond hair, with a
permanent."
Now he's talking easily, without hesitation, relieved that it's no
longer about his own problems. "She delivered a sort of ultimatum. 'Not
going to let my life be all messed up,' that sort of thing. Not that she
looks as if she'll lack for entertainment while we're promenading around
out here. Nice mess for the Chief. Now she's pregnant, too."
Another silence, then when Kriechbaum starts up once more he's as
hesitant as he was at first. He's obviously talking about himself again. 
"You find yourself carrying so much ballast around--better not to think
about it too much!"
We devote ourselves to the horizon again. I scour it with my
glasses, inch by inch. Then I rest the binoculars and look out across the
sea and sky to relax my eye muscles. Then I squint and raise the glasses
again. Always the same routine: search horizon, lower binoculars, take a
look all around, raise binoculars again.
Ahead of the boat, two points to port, there's a fog bank--a clump
of dirty, gray-green wool--clinging to the horizon. The navigator
concentrates on that area. Fog banks are always suspect.
A good ten minutes pass before he takes up the thread again.
"Perhaps it's the only thing to do--away with the whole _menkenke!_"
This goes around in my brain for a while: "_Menkenke_"--isn't that
Jewish for "bag of tricks" or something? Where can he have come across
"_menkenke_"? "_Fisimatenten_"--that's another one--for "fuss."
"_Menkenke_" . . . "_fisimatenten_"--you could go nuts speculating over
things like that.
I remember Ensign Ullmann. He has his troubles too. Ullmann is from
Breslau. With his snub nose and those sparse freckles scattered all over
his face, he looks like a fourteen-year-old. At the base I saw him once
in his blue dress uniform. With his big peaked cap on his head, he looked
like a clown done up in a costume that had been bought too large so he
could grow into it.
The ensign is popular. He seems to be a tough fellow. Actually,
he's not so much small as compact, and, viewed close up, he's older than
he looks at first: He didn't get all those creases in his face just from
laughter.
One day when I was alone with him in the petty officers' mess he
started behaving oddly: fiddling aimlessly with the utensils on the
table, pushing them here and there, laying a knife parallel to a fork and
glancing up from time to time to catch my attention.
I realized that he wanted to tell me something.
"D'you know the flower store next to the café, A l'Ami Pierrot?"
"Of course, and the two salesgirls. Pretty thing, Jeannette, and
what's the other one's name?"
"Françoise," the ensign said. "As a matter of fact, I'm engaged to
her--secretly, of course."
"Tst!" I sputtered in sheer astonishment: our little ensign with
his porcupine haircut and his outsized dress uniform engaged to a French
girl!
"She's nice," I said.
The ensign was sitting on his bunk, hands palms up on his thighs,
looking helpless--his confession seemed to have worn him out.
Gradually it all came out. The girl is pregnant. The ensign is not
so naïve as to be unaware of what it would mean for her to have a child.
We are the enemy. Collaborators usually get short shrift. The ensign
knows how active the Maquis are. The girl obviously knows it even better.
"Besides, she doesn't want the child!" he said, but so hesitantly
that I asked, "Well?"
"Not if we get back!"
"Hmm," I said. Embarrassed, I could think of nothing better than,
"Ullmann, that's no reason to be so depressed. Everything will straighten
out. You're imagining things!"
"Yes," was all he said.
Up with the glasses again. They ought to make them lighter. The
navigator beside me says bitingly, "The gentlemen at Headquarters ought
to see all this just once--nothing but ocean and not a trace of the
enemy. I can just imagine how they picture it: we put to sea, run around
for a few days, and hey presto--here come the freighters, sailing along,
crowds of them and all loaded to the gunwales. A daring attack--fire
everything we've got. A few depth charges in return just to teach us not
to get too uppity. The victory pennants on the periscope for a lot of fat
tankers, and tie up at the pier grinning from ear to ear. Brass bands and
decorations, of course. But there really ought to be a film of all this:
closeups of pure shit. Horizon bald as a baby's bottom, a couple of
clouds--and that's it. Then they could film the inside of the boat: moldy
bread, filthy necks, rotten lemons, torn shirts, sweaty blankets, and, as
a grand finale, all of us looking utterly pissed-off."
_Sixteenth Day at Sea._ The Chief seems to be in a good mood today.
Probably because he succeeded in making an especially complicated repair
on one of the engines. He's even persuaded to whistle for us.
"Ought to be in vaudeville!" says the Old Man.
I only have to close my eyes for a second to see every detail of
the scene in the Bar Royal, with Merkel's Chief trying to teach me to
whistle on two fingers. The art of whistling--in this flotilla, at least-
-is apparently a specialty of the engineers.
How long ago it seems. The musicians with their empty, staring
eyes, and crazy Trumann. Thomsen, lying in his own piss, bellowing
slogans through a cloud of bubbles.
"Haven't heard from Trumann in a long time," the Old Man says
suddenly, as though he'd read my thoughts. "He must have put out long
ago!"
Nothing from Kortmann either, nor from Merkel.
We have only heard Kallmann and Saemisch by accident, when they
were ordered to report their positions. Plus the reports that our
radioman also picked up of Flechsig's and Bechtel's boats.
"This is going to be a shitty month," growls the Old Man. "The
others don't seem to be having any luck either."
Another hour and ten minutes until dinnertime--seventy minutes,
four thousand two hundred seconds!
The radioman Hinrich comes in and delivers a message addressed
specifically to us. The Chief takes the slip of paper, gets the
deciphering machine out of the locker, puts it down among the plates,
carefully tests the setting, and begins to strike the keys.
The navigator turns up as if by accident, and watches out of the
corner of his eye. The Chief pretends to be completely absorbed. Not a
muscle moves in his face. Finally he winks at the navigator and gives the
deciphered radiogram to the Commander.
It's only an order to report our position.
The Commander and the navigator disappear into the control room.
Won't be long before the radioman spits out a brief signal with our
coordinates.
IV FRIGGING AROUND: 2
The boat continues to wander around with its cargo of fourteen
torpedoes and one hundred twenty shells for the 8.8 millimeter cannon.
Only the amount of 3.7 ammunition has been slightly reduced by practice
firing. And a good deal of our 114 tons of oil has gone. We are also the
lighter by a fair amount of our provisions.
So far we have contributed nothing to the war effort of Greater
Germany. We haven't inflicted the slightest damage on the enemy. We have
added no luster to our name. We haven't loosened Albion's death grip, or
added a single new leaf to the laurels of the German U-boat Command; blah
blah blah . . .
We have merely stood watch, gobbled food, digested it, inhaled bad
smells, and produced a few ourselves.
And we haven't even got off any misses. They would at least have
made space in the bow compartment. But all the torpedoes are still here,
expertly tended, greased to perfection and regularly tested.
The sky grows darker, and the tattered sheets of water that hang
from the net guards after every plunge of the boat are as gray as laundry
washed in wartime soap. All around us there is nothing but gray on gray;
no line of division between the gray of the sea and the gray of the sky.
Higher up, where the sun ought to be, the gray is only a shade lighter.
The sky looks like watered-down gruel.
Even the foam on the occasional breaking wave is no longer white.
It is soiled, second hand.
The howl of the wind sounds like the yowling of a kicked dog,
spiritless and depressing.
We are heading against the sea. The boat stamps along like a
rocking horse: up and down, up and down. The strain of peering ahead
becomes a torment. I have to keep cheering myself up lest I fall prey to
the sick hopelessness that engulfs us all and sink into apathy.
The gray light seems filtered through gauze and weighs on the
eyelids. The watery mist makes it dimmer still. There is nothing solid in
this soup to catch one's attention.
If only something would happen! If only the diesels would run at
full speed for a while, if the boat would throw up a bow wave again
instead of jouncing around at this soul-destroying jogtrot. Head stuffed
with cotton, heavy limbs, aching eyes.
Shitty sea, shitty wind, frigging around!
As the oldest man in the bow compartment, the E-stoker Hagen
commands universal respect. And he obviously knows it. In the dim light
all I can see of his face is eyes and nose. The high, curled ends of his
mustache reach almost to his eyelids. Forehead hidden under a thick
thatch of hair. His black beard is thick and long, since he didn't
sacrifice it even during our time in port. From a favorite phrase of his,
he's known on board as "the Plain, Straightforward Fellow." He already
has seven patrols behind him, six of them on another boat.
"Tsch!" says Hagen, and at once everyone is silent.
I stretch my legs, brace my back against the frame of a lower bunk,
and wonder what's to come.
Hagen savors this expectancy to the full, wipes the palms of his
hands thoroughly on the hair of his chest, and drains the teapot into his
cup. Relaxed, he then savors his tea, swallowing it in great gulps.
"Well, out with it, 0 Gracious One! Speak, Lord for Thy servant
heareth!"
"I was once so angry at the Tommies!--"
". . . in my plain, straightforward way!" This last from a bunk;
Hagen answers it with a glance of truly theatrical contempt.
"It was hellish weather--just like--today, and they got us by the
nuts off the Orkneys, a great batch of escort vessels standing over us.
No decent depth under our keel. No chance of escaping underwater.
Surprise packages of depth charges all day long--"
He takes a mouthful of tea, but doesn't swallow it immediately.
Instead he swishes it noisily around a few times between his teeth.
"Nice bombing job. Then the Tommies went quiet. Simply waited up
there for us to surface. The second night, our Commander went mad, used
every trick he knew, including the thin silhouette, and suddenly we're up
and away. The Tommies must have been sleeping on the job. I can't
understand it even now. The very next day we sank a destroyer. Nearly ran
into it in the fog. Had to fire at almost point-blank range."
Hagen falls into a trance, and someone plays midwife again. "Come
on, out with the rest!"
"We got the destroyer at angle zero!" Hagen demonstrates with two
matches. "Here's the enemy destroyer, and here's our boat." He arranges
the matches with their heads facing each other. "I was the first to spot
her--in my plain, straightforward way!"
"Now we're getting it--didn't I tell you?" The voice from the bunk
again.
Hagen cuts the story short. Pushing the matches around, he
demonstrates the attack. "Sank in a matter of seconds."
He reaches for the match representing the destroyer and breaks it
in two. Then gets up and tramples it under his boot.
The helmsman Little Benjamin pretends to be fascinated. He gazes
straight into Hagen's face, simultaneously trying to make off with a
piece of bread that Hagen's just buttered for himself. But Hagen is on
the alert and slaps his fingers smartly. "Not so fast with my bread and
butter."
"My mistake," Little Benjamin says apologetically, "as the hedgehog
remarked when he got up off the toilet brush."
Control-room assistant Turbo also has something to contribute. He's
cut out a cigar and a plum from the advertisements in a magazine and
pasted them together to make an obscene montage that he now proudly hands
around.
"Swine!" says Hagen.
For three days and three nights the radioman has picked up nothing
but position reports from other boats. No victory announcements. "Never
known such a total washout!" says the Old Man. "Absolute bottom."
The sea seethes and boils. The wind keeps whipping up the surface
into a gray-white plain. Not a single patch of the usual' beer-bottle
green, only dull white and gray. When our bow works its way free of the 
waves it seems to be festooned on both sides with dripping decorations of
stucco.
Brooding bleakly at breakfast time, the Old Man simply forgets to
chew. It isn't until the steward enters to clear the meal away that he
suddenly comes to with a start, moves his lower jaw busily for a few
minutes, then drifts off again with his thoughts. Finally he pushes his
plate away indifferentry and pulls himself together. He gives us a
friendly glance and opens his mouth to speak but seems unable to find a
single word. He saves himself with a few official announcements: "09.00,
practice dive; io.oo, instruction for petty officers! Maintain course
until 12.00." Same old thing.
The First Watch Officer is not the least of the causes of the Old
Man's depression. The expression on the man's face--at best faintly
critical, often openly contemptuous--grates on the Old Man's nerves. His
pedantic mannerisms unsettle all of us, both on watch and off, in much
the same way as a driver who sticks exactly to the rules produces chaos
in traffic. Most of all, however, it is his thinly concealed political
convictions that irritate the Old Man.
"He really seems to hate the Tommies," the Old Man says just after
the First Watch Officer has gone on duty. "Thoroughly indoctrinated. At
least he's got it all worked out to his own satisfaction."
I'd give a lot for a half hour's walk--or a cross-country run
through the woods. My calf muscles have gone slack. My existence consists
of nothing but lying down, standing up, and sitting still. Some hard
physical exercise would be a big help. Felling trees, for instance. The
very thought makes me smell the pines. I can almost picture orange-red
chips of felled timber, the cabins we used to build ourselves, hear the
rustling of reeds, see myself hunting water rats. Dear god. . .
The radio has picked up a message. We behave with elaborate
indifference, yet each of us is longing for a radio order that will put
an end to all this frigging around. After a contemptuous glance at the
decoding machine, the Commander reads the slip, noiselessly moving his
lips, and disappears without a word through the circular door.
We look at one another.
Plagued by curiosity, I move into the control room. The Commander
is bent over the sea chart. For the moment I must wait in vain. In his
left hand he holds the slip and with his right he's manipulating the
dividers.
"It's possible--not altogether out of the question," I hear him
murmur. The First Watch Officer can no longer endure the uncertainty and
begs for the slip of paper. "Convoy in Square XY. Zigzag course around
sixty degrees, speed eight knots--UM." One glance at the chart and I feel
sure we can reach Square XY.
The navigator clears his throat, looking totally indifferent, and
asks the Commander for the new course. You'd think the radiogram had
brought us nothing more than the new retail price of potatoes.
The Commander isn't giving away anything either. "Wait and see," he
says.
Everyone falls silent. The Chief bores into a tooth with his
tongue. The navigator becomes absorbed in his fingernails while the
Commander measures angles and lays off distances with the dividers--the
problem of interception.
The navigator peeps over the Old Man's shoulder as he works. I get
myself a few prunes from the box and move the pits back and forth in my
mouth, trying to pick them clean. The control-room mate has nailed a milk
can to the wooden wall for the pits. It's already half full. Mine are by
far the cleanest.
UM--that's Marten's boat. Marten, who used to be the Old Man's
First Watch Officer and is now serving with the Sixth Flotilla in Brest.
New radio messages tell us that three boats have been ordered to
join in pursuit of the convoy, then four, then finally five.
We're not one of them.
"They ought to be sending in everything that can move," is the Old
Man's comment. What he probably wants to say is, "Hell and damnation,
when are we finally going to get our orders?"
Hour after hour goes by, and still no radio message for us. The
Commander squats in the corner of his bunk and busies himself with a
collection of colored folders full of all sorts of memoranda: secret
orders, tactical regulations, flotilla orders, and all the other
paperwork that's always going the rounds. Everyone knows that he detests
this sort of official waste paper, that he's only taken the folders out
to hide how tense he really is.
Toward 17.00, another radio message finally arrives. The Commander
lifts his eyebrows: his whole face lights up. A personal message for us!
He reads it and his face shuts tight again. Almost absentmindedly he
pushes the note over to me: it's an order to report weather conditions.
The navigator makes out the report and hands the sheet to the
Commander for his signature: "Barometer rising, air temperature five
degrees, wind northwest six, cloud, cirro-stratus, visibility seven
miles--UA."
Not wanting to be infected by the Old Man's depression, I head for
the control room and climb up the ladder. The thin veil of cirrus has
grown thicker. The tattered blue gradually disappears behind it. The sky
will soon be clothed in gray-on-gray. The light becomes duller. All
around, dark clouds have piled up heavily against the horizon. Their
lower edges merge shapelessly into the gray of the surrounding sky. It's
only higher up that they're clearly silhouetted against the whiter gray.
I push my hands deep into the pockets of my leather jacket and stand
there balancing with bent knees against the motion of the boat while the
clouds swell slowly higher as if inflated from within. Dead ahead, the
wind tears a hole in them, but more clouds pile in at once from either
side to seal the hole again. They form a mighty phalanx that will soon
threaten to conquer the whole sky. And then, as if the many collisions
and occlusions weren't already causing enough confusion, the sun comes
bursting through a rift: its beams slant down like spears to make a
dramatic play of light and shadow on the tumultuous mass. Next, a bright
flash touches the sea, broad on the starboard beam; then the spotlight
wanders on over a trailing, padded rim of cloud, making it flare into
brilliance. It darts back and forth, never lingering anywhere for more
than a moment, crowning one cloud after another with a halo of light.
The Second Watch Officer is not impressed by the transformations of
the sky. "Damned flyer's clouds!" For him the magnificent scenery is
riddled with trickery. Again and again he trains his glasses on it.
I climb down and busy myself with my cameras. Evening comes. Up
onto the bridge again. Now the clouds are sprinkled with iridescent
colors. Suddenly the light of the sun abandons them, and they immediately 
revert to their own dreary gray. High in the sky there's a pale phantom,
the last quarter of the waning moon. i8.oo.
After the evening meal we sit tongue-tied, still expecting another
radio message. The Commander is uneasy. Every fifteen minutes he
disappears into the control room and busies himself at the chart table.
Five pairs of eyes are fixed on him each time he returns. Futile. He says
nothing.
The Chief finally makes an attempt to coax the Commander out of his
sullen silence. "About time that contact man reported again."
The Commander pays no attention.
The Chief reaches for a book. All right, if there's not going to be
any talk, I can pretend to read too. The Second Watch Officer and the
Second Engineer thumb through newspapers, the First Watch Officer
immerses himself in official-looking folders.
I'm on my way to my locker and just passing the radio shack when I
see the radioman, eyes half closed in the light of his small lamp,
scribbling down a message.
I stop dead in my tracks. Back into the Officers' Mess. The Second
Watch Officer quickly starts deciphering it. Suddenly a look of
consternation comes over his face. Something's wrong.
The Commander holds the message in his hand and his face slowly
assumes the same bewildered expression you see on boxers after a hard
blow to the chin.
He reads out the message. "Surprised by destroyer coming out of
rain squall. Four hours' depth charges. Contact lost, am pursuing in
Square Bruno Karl--UM."
At the last words his voice dies away. He stares for a good minute
at the radiogram, audibly takes a deep breath, stares again, then finally
blows the air out of both cheeks. He also lets himself sink back in the
corner of his sofa. Not a word, not a curse, nothing.
Later we're sitting on the railing in the "greenhouse" behind the
bridge.
"This is madness," says the Old Man. "It feels as if we're bouncing
across the Atlantic all on our own. And at the very same time-- right
now, sure as fate--there are hundreds of ships at sea and some of them
are probably not far away. Except they're beyond the horizon." With
bitterness in his voice, he adds, "Curvature of the earth is something
the dear Lord must have invented just for the English. What can we
possibly see from way down here? We might as well be sitting in a canoe.
Pathetic that nobody's come up with a solution yet."
"But they have," I say. "Airplanes!"
"Oh yes, airplanes. The _enemy_ has those. Where are our own sea
scouts keeping themselves, that's what I'd like to know. A big mouth is
all Fatbelly Goering supplies. That Reichsmaster of Hounds!"
Luckily the Chief bobs up. "Just grabbing a mouthful of fresh air.
"It's getting a bit crowded here," I say and disappear below.
A glance at the sea chart. As usual--the pencil line that records
our course tacks back and forth like a folding yardstick out of control.
The Old Man also comes below. He sits down carefully on the chart
chest, and there's a pause before he takes up where he left off. 'Perhaps
we'll still be lucky. If they send in enough boats, there's a chance
someone will make contact again."
Next morning I read a radiogram picked up during the night. Square
Bruno Karl search a failure--UM."
The next day is the worst since our departure. We avoid speaking
and keep out of one another's way as though we had scurvy. I spend most
of the time on the sofa in the Officers' Mess. The Chief doesn't even
emerge from the engine room for meals. The Second Engineer also stays
with his machines. We three, the First Watch Officer, the Second Watch
Officer, and I, don't dare say a word to the Old Man, who stares holes in
the air and only consumes a few spoonfuls of thick soup.
Silence also reigns in the next door Quarters. The radioman
carefully avoids putting a record on the turntable. Even the steward
works with downcast eyes as though he were serving at a wake.
Finally the Commander opens his mouth. "The other lot just aren't
making mistakes any more!"
Later, Zeitler starts up again with another of his knowing remarks:
"Y'know . . . first thing in the morning's really the best." It doesn't
take a genius to know what subject we're back on. Wichmann and Frenssen
are all ears.
"I was in Hamburg one time . . . had to deliver a letter for my
Chief. It was when I was still serving with the minesweepers. Anyhow,
there I am, I ring the bell, and who comes to answer it but this little
blond bombshell. Mother's out, just gone to the post office, back in a
minute, do come in . . . so I do. Inside there's a kind of hall with a
couch in it. I get a scumbag on and her skirt off in no time flat, and
just as we finish banging, the door starts . her mother's opened it and
got stuck by the safety chain! Luckily the couch is too far to one side,
so she can't see us through the crack. Missy shoves her panties out of
sight under a cushion, but I almost forget to zip up before shaking
stinkfingers with the old lady. Zeitler, how d'you do, pleased to meet
you, 'fraid I have to run, due back, you know how it is . . . and I'm out
of there. It's not till I'm taking a piss hours later that I realize I've
still got my rubber on. Or rather, it's not till _after_ I take the piss
and I find myself looking down at this huge yellow cucumber. What a mess!
And the guy standing next to me is laughing himself sick . . ."
The First Watch Officer's daily shave is the talk of the bow
compartment. "Upsetting the whole place--whoever heard of such a thing--
spending all your time in the can, shaving."
"The Old Man ought to issue an ultimatum."
"One shithouse for the whole crew and we have to have a bathing
beauty like that on board!"
Pilgrim pulls some photographs out of his wallet. One of them shows
a man on a pier. "My father!" he explains to me. He sounds as if he's
introducing us. "Died in the prime of life--that's the way I want to go
too."
What on earth is there to say? I don't dare look Pilgrim in the
face but simply mutter, "Fine photo."
He seems satisfied.
"The emotional life of most of the crew is a complete mystery to
me," the Old Man said to me once. "How can you know what the men are
thinking? Once in a while you find out something, and it knocks you right 
off your feet, like the story of Frenssen's donna-- Frenssen the diesel
mechanic mate. He met this lady on leave. Then he left on patrol and she
got no mail from him so she went to a fortune teller. Apparently there
are still some around. He'd neglected to tell his lady that we don't
often get to the post office. Apparently the fortune teller put on a big
act, then gasped, 'I see water-- nothing but water.'"
The Old Man was doing both voices: the fortune teller's and the
lady's. "'And no U-boat?' 'No, water--only water--nothing but water!' The
donna, who considered herself our diesel mechanic mate's fiancée, started
screaming, 'He must be dead!' The fortune teller remained as silent as
the Oracle itself. D'you know what happened next? The donna put her hands
to her head and wailed, 'Oh god-- and I'm still wearing red!' Wrote one
letter after another to the flotilla. To me too. I had the rest of the
story from Frenssen. He didn't go to Paris on his last leave. He'd had
enough!"
I'm sitting alone with the Old Man in the Officers' Mess. We pick
up a radiogram addressed to Bachmann. It's the third time in four days
that Bachmann's boat is being ordered to report.
"All quiet on the Western Front," murmurs the Commander. "Very
likely he's caught it too. The shape he was in, he should never have been
allowed to put to sea." The old story: When does a commander become
"ripe" for retirement and have to be relieved? Why are there no medical
men to make sure that the boats don't put to sea with commanders on the
verge of total breakdown?
Ziemer sailed with Bachmann as First Watch Officer. Ziemar drowned?
I see him with the waitress from the flotilla mess, lying in the sun.
Always eager to learn, he was having her anatomy explained to him in
French. Practicing on a live model. First he took hold of her breasts and
said, "_Les dnduns_." "_Les seins!_" the waitress corrected him. Then he
pushed his hand between her legs and said, "_Lapin!_" Whereupon she put
him right: "_Le vagine_"; and so it went.
From next door we can hear the First Watch Officer giving a class
in security precautions. "They'll gabble just the same!" the Old Man
comments. He broods for a while, then: "This whole secrecy business is a
farce. The Tommies have had an undamaged boat of ours for ages now."
"Really?"
"Yes, one that surrendered. Ramlow's boat. South of Iceland in the
open sea; all our secret material, all the codes, everything--the Tommies
got all of it in one fell swoop!"
"That must have made the C-in-C happy!"
"When you think that Ramlow may even have been a secret agent--you
can't even trust your own right hand. He managed to talk his officers
into it--hard to believe!"
Only one more day at cruising speed till we reach the new field of
operations. A radio message is picked up. Tension while we wait for it to
be decoded.
It's addressed to Flechsig. Ordered to shift his position seventy
miles westward. Apparently a convoy is expected to pass through at that
point. The navigator shows me the spot on a small-scale chart. It's close
to the American coast, i.e., many days sailing away from us. A little 
later we pick up a radio signal directed to a boat stationed near
Iceland, Böhler's boat; and to a third operating near Gibraltar--UJ---
that's Kortmann. Kortmann, who was involved in the foul-up with the
_Bismarck_ tanker.
A boat reports that it's unable to dive. Meinig's. Foul-mouthed
Meinig. If it's unable to dive, a boat is practically lost,
"Shit!" says the Old Man. "Not even pursuit escort--too far away.
All we can do is keep our fingers crossed."
He bends forward and raps three times underneath the table. "Let's
hope he makes it. Meinig, it would be Meinig!"
We all sit there silent. The Old Man's lips move noiselessly.
Perhaps he's figuring out how long it will take Meinig's boat to reach
Saint Nazaire at cruising speed.
A cold shudder runs down my back: Just what will they do if the
Sunderlands appear? Or destroyers? As a surface vessel the U-boat is
hopelessly inferior to its opponents. Too little engine power to get
away, no armor, guns too small. More vulnerable than almost any other
ship: a single hit on the pressure hull and that's it.
"Boy, oh boy!" is all the Chief can say. It's obvious how
completely he's identifying with his colleague on the other boat. He's
actually gone white.
"Meier Two or Three is with Meinig, isn't he, Chief?" asks the Old
Man.
"Meier Two, Herr Kaleun--in my class at the academy!"
No one opens his mouth. We stare at the table as though there's
something--anything--to be seen there. I can hardly breathe. I also know
one of the men in that boat--Habermann--the Bait Habermann who was with
me on that wretched inspection cruise to Götenhafen: midwinter, twentyfive degrees below zero and an east wind.
I can remember him sitting on the cold linoleum--stark naked--legs
stretched out stiff in front of him, back braced against the silk-covered
wall of the _Cap Arcona_, head on his chest, dribbling. No respect for
the impressive interior appointments of the former luxury liner now a
floating barracks.
I am overtaken by a nervous fit of the giggles: old barefoot
Habermann--that was when he'd just got over his third dose of the clap.
Later he told me that he'd been looking for the washroom and had
lost his way. Naked and desperate, he had just sat down and waited for a
rescuer.
Pneumonia? Not a chance! Never one for domestic comforts, he
couldn't be knocked out by spending hours sitting on his naked ass. Not
even ten doses of clap could do that. But now it looks as though the
Tommies have managed it. A three-star announcement will be coming up.
Flemming, Habermann--there aren't many left!
The Old Man is the first to speak. He means to change the subject
but actually stays with it. "A _proper_ submarine, now that would be
something. We're not really a submarine. All we have here is a diving
boat."
Silence. Only after a surprised look from me does he explain,
between pauses, "after all, the capacity of our storage batteries is only
enough for short attacks at periscope level or a quick run underwater to
escape pursuit. Actually, we're completely dependent on the surface. It's 
impossible to do more than eighty miles underwater even when we're
conserving power as much as we can. If we run underwater at our top speed
of nine knots, the batteries are flat in one to two hours. Not exactly
luxurious. And yet the batteries are an enormous dead weight. Those lead
plates weigh more than all the rest of the boat's machinery put together.
Now a real submarine would be able to travel underwater, with no diesels
requiring air and producing exhaust gas. It wouldn't be as vulnerable
without all the equipment we need now--all those openings in the pressure
hull. What we need is some form of engine that's independent of the
atmosphere."
We have barely reached the new area of operations when a radio
message comes in. We are to be marshaled into a group with other boats,
i.e., form a reconnaissance patrol. The area to be covered lies a good
distance farther to the west. It'll take us two days to get there at
cruising speed.
"They've christened the group 'Wolf Pack'--marvelous!" says the Old
Man. "Apparently they have a kind of court poet at Staff Headquarters who
thinks up this bullshit--'Wolf Pack'! 'Daisies' would have done just as
well, but no: keep banging the drum . . ."
To the Old Man, even "area of operations" sounds too highflown. If
he had his way, the usual naval rhetoric would be thoroughly deflated. He
himself can spend hours thinking up the worst possible banalities for his
entries in the war log.
I read over what I've written in my blue notebook:
Sunday. Sixteenth day at sea. Report of convoy headed east. We are
on course at ninety degrees to direction of convoy.
Monday. Seventeenth day at sea. Given new base line. Farther south.
Dragnet being drawn that way. Probably only five boats in our new patrol-
-some dragnet!: either the mesh is too big or the net is too small. Speed
eight knots. Let's hope the ship's positions tally. Also that the General
Staff has taken due account of the unfavorable weather conditions in our
area.
No machine-gun practice because of bad visibility. "Might just as
well throw it away." We dive to listen.
Wednesday. Nineteenth day at sea. Another new tack. Only slight
groundswell, no artillery practice possible. The weather must have joined
the Allies.
Thursday. Twentieth day at sea. Radio silence except for enemy
reports. More than five boats now assembled in our area. The enemy
mustn't learn that we're gathering. Results of search: nil. Moderate sea.
Light wind from northwest. Strato-cumulus clouds. But heavy layer of mist
down close to the water. No trace of convoy.
Friday. Twenty-first day at sea. We've been assigned yet another
new outpost patrol.
"God knows where the bastards are bucketing around!" growls the
Commander.
_Twenty-second Day at Sea._ The watches seem to go on forever. Sky
like beef suet. All day long, this huge heavy dome of fat weighing down
on the dark sea--and no sun to melt it.
Today we have a superb, unbroken horizon. Nothing on it. Not a
single bristle of a mist. Nothing. If only we could get up higher! That,
of course, has often been tried. Take the kite experiment. They sent a
man up on a kite back during World War I, but apparently it wasn't much
of a success.
_Twenty-third Day at Sea._ The wind has picked up, and the sea has
become a gigantic field of breakers. The waves don't rise all that much,
yet all of them break. This makes the sea look gray-white and ancient.
The sky is dismal, a uniform gray cloth stretched over our heads. A
sagging curtain of rain begins to fall from the gray, over to starboard.
A single patch of light on the horizon glows faintly through the streaks.
The wall of rain is slate-gray, with a trace of violet in it. Haze
spreads out like fog on all sides. The wall is advancing slowly but
directly at us, so the Commander has his oilskins and sou'-wester brought
up. He's swearing.
We're in the midst of a cloudburst. No longer any air. The flail of
the rain raises welts on the waves, which hunch their backs under it. No
more rising crests, not the slightest glitter of reflection. Only our
heavily dripping bow that tears them apart and tosses spray into the air.
Streams of rain and spray mix on our faces.
The glassy green of the water has faded, the white veins have
disappeared; the sea has grown older by a thousand years. It is gray,
miserable, pock-marked.
No shimmer, no color. Nothing but uniform, soul-destroying gray.
The bridge guards stand like blocks of stone beneath a sky that is
turning itself inside out. Six of us try to penetrate the wall of water;
no point in using glasses now--they'd mist over immediately. It's as
though the rain were trying to drown us.
Only toward evening does the wild fury of the downpour abate. It's
night before it stops entirely.
_Twenty-fourth Day at Sea_. In the control room. The Old Man is
talking half to me and half to himself. "Strange how little time one side
or the other can hold the upper hand thanks to a new weapon. Never lasts
more than a few months. We invented the tactic of hunting in packs, and
the enemy built up their defense system. Which also worked. Prien's boat,
Schepke's, Kretschmer's, all of them were lost against a single convoy.
Now we have the new acoustic torpedo with its homing head, and the
Tommies are already towing those damned rattling buoys along on a long
steel cable-- they divert the torpedoes because they make more racket
than the screws. Action and counteraction--always the same. Nothing
stimulates the brain cells like a desire to wipe out the other side."
For more than three weeks now we have been voyaging into emptiness.
The uniform days flow one into another.
The boat drew a blank on its last patrol. Returned to base after a
long, exhausting voyage without having fired a single torpedo. "The
bastards seem to be avoiding us," says the Second Watch Officer, the only
one who still keeps up an attempt at the odd joke. It takes us a half day 
to traverse the attack area assigned to us and reach its northern border.
"Time to change course!" the helmsman shouts up through the open hatch.
"Hard a-port! New course one hundred eighty degrees!" The Watch
Officer.
Slowly the bow swings through a semicircle of the horizon. The wake
curls like a snake, and the sun, distorted into a white patch by multiple
layers of cloud, pushes itself to the other side of the boat.
"Heading one hundred eighty degrees!" The voice of the helmsman
again.
The course indicator now stands at i8o degrees. It was at 360
degrees. Otherwise nothing has changed.
Not much to see from the bridge. The sea has dozed off. Only a few
ruffles on a tired, elderly groundswell. The air is motionless. The
clouds stand still like captive balloons.
Bone-weary, I still find myself keeping a watchful eye on the
stolid progress of the minute hand around the dial above the galley door.
Finally I fall into a semi-trance.
The thin shell of sleep is suddenly ruptured: the alarm bell
shrills. The floor is already tilting.
Sleep-tousled, the Chief crouches behind the hydroplane operators.
The Commander stands motionless beside them. The navigator, who gave the
alarm, is holding fast to the ladder. He's still breathing hard from the
effort of sealing the hatch.
"Raise the stern--forward ten--aft fifteen--up slowly!" the Chief
orders.
"A shadow--at ninety degrees--quite distinct!" the navigator
finally explains to me.
The sound gear is in action; the operator's head is thrust forward
into the gangway. His eyes are blank as he slowly searches the water for
noises. "Sound of screws at seventy degrees--receding!" And after a
while, "Sounds growing weaker--fading out!"
"That's how it goes," the Commander says, unmoved, and shrugs
slightly. "Course one thirty degrees!" and he disappears through the
circular hatch. So--we'll remain submerged for a while.
"Thank god, it's quiet!"
"Some fast vessel sailing unescorted--not a chance when it's _this_
dark."
I'm hardly back in my bunk when I pass out.
"Enemy convoy in sight--UX."
"Convoy in sight Square XW, one sixty degrees, speed ten knots--
UX."
"Enemy following zigzag course around fifty degrees. Speed ten
knots--UW."
"Convoy traveling in several columns. Surrounded by escort vessels.
Course twenty degrees. Speed nine knots--UK."
The radio spares us nothing. We know everything that's going on in
the Atlantic theater of war. But we can't reach a single one of the
reported convoys; they're all in the North Atlantic. We're positioned
much too far to the south of them.
"If it goes on this way, we'll still be at sea come Christmas,"
Zeitler says.
"Well, what of it?" Rademacher answers. "That won't cause any
embarrassment. We've got a Christmas tree on board."
"Come on!"
"I'm telling you! It's an artificial, collapsible thing--like an
umbrella--in a cardboard carton. If you don't believe me, go ask Number
One."
"Typical of the Navy!" says Ensign Ullmann. Then to my surprise he
starts telling us about his Christmas experiences. "Someone always died
at Christmas in our flotilla. New Year's Eve, too. In 1940 it was a
bosun. It was around twelve o'clock on Christmas Eve when he played his
little joke. Wanted to be a daredevil; put his automatic to his forehead
and actually crooked his finger around the trigger while we stood and
gaped at him. Of course, he had taken the magazine out beforehand. Only
he wasn't smart enough to remember there was already a shell in the
barrel--and bang-- off flew the back of his skull. Made one hell of a
mess!"
The shattered skull reminds Hinrich of something. "Once we had a
fellow who blew his whole face off--New Year's Eve. That was when I was
still serving on a patrol boat. We were all dead drunk. At twelve o'clock
on the dot one of the petty officers came on the bridge carrying a kind
of hand grenade. Those miserable things were still around at that time
and you lit them exactly like a firecracker, with a fuse. He stood beside
the railing and put a cigarette to the fuse and blew on it just right.
Only then he got his paws mixed up: he hurled the cigarette into the
drink and went on holding the grenade right in front of his snout. Of
course, it exploded--that was some mess too!"
I don't want to listen to any more.
In the U-room, instruction for petty officers is in progress again.
First Watch Officer lecturing. ". . . fell in action against a convoy..."
The Old Man rolls his eyes and looks furious.
"'Fell'? That's another of those damn fool expressions. I suppose
he tripped? I've seen thousands of photos of soldiers who 'fell.' Well,
they didn't look so good after they 'landed.' Why doesn't anyone have the
guts to say that the man they're talking about was drowned? I get ill
when I come across all the nonsense they churn out about us."
He pushes himself to his feet and heads for his cubbyhole; comes
back holding a news clipping. "Got something here--kept it especially for
you."
"'_Well, First Watch Officer, that's it! Another five thousand
gross registered tons. But tomorrow is my wife's birthday. We should do
something to mark it, Honor our womenfolk! We must never forget that!'
The First Watch Officer grins understandingly and the Commander lies down
on his hard couch to make up for lost sleep. But hardly an hour has
passed when the First Watch Officer shakes him awake. 'Birthday steamer,
Herr Kaleun!' The Commander shoots to the bridge: everything happens very
fast. 'Tubes one and two stand by for underwater shot!' Both torpedoes
are hits. 'At least six thousand gross registered tons!' says the
Commander. 'Is Herr Kaleun satisfied with his birthday present?' 'Very!' 
replies the Commander. And the face of his First Watch Officer is
transfigured with joy_."
The Old Man starts cursing again. "And that's the kind of stuff
people are given to read. Incredible."
Wherever I look_nothing but clenched teeth, faces dull with
disgust, irritation, discontent.
Almost impossible to imagine there's still dry land somewhere.
Houses. Pleasant rooms. Lamps. The warmth from the stove.
The warmth from the stove. Suddenly I catch the smell of baked
apples, wafting through the iron grating of the green stove that reached
to the ceiling in our living room at z8 Bahnhofstrasse. There were always
baked apples at this time of year. I inhale their sweet, spicy smell; I
juggle one--hot, hot, hot--rejoicing in the play of color of the burst
skin: smooth, gleaming, polished. Apples from our own trees, the kind
with red streaks on a yellow background; at the center of the red rays is
the blossom. It looks as if transparent red lacquer had been dripped over
each one.
"Nice here. No mail, no telephone," the Old Man remarks suddenly,
sitting down on the leather sofa beside me. "Well-ventilated boat,
handsome wood veneer, open house. On the whole we've made out pretty
well."
". . . horse shit," says the Chief, appearing like a jack-in-thebox. "He's certainly made out all right, hasn't he? And he doesn't have
to worry about promotion any more--he's even allowed to smoke."
The Old Man is thoroughly disconcerted.
Meanwhile the others have assembled around the table for the daily
squeezing of lemons, a self-imposed task that little by little has
assumed the character of ritual. We are haunted by images of the
devastation that can result from a lack of vitamin C. I see the circle
around the table as hideous, toothless ghosts painfully gumming hard
crusts of bread: that's scurvy.
Everyone has his own method of downing lemon juice. The Chief first
cuts the fruit in two, systematically pierces the juice cells in each
half as though expecting to spend the whole evening at it, then sticks a
small piece of lump sugar into each of the halves and sucks the juice
noisily through the sugar. No regard for etiquette.
The Second Watch Officer has hit upon a particularly striking
procedure. He squeezes the lemon juice into a glass, mixes it with sugar
and then adds a dash of condensed milk. The milk curdles immediately and
the whole thing looks loathsome. It makes the Old Man shudder every time,
but the Second Watch Officer pays no attention. He proudly names his
drink "The U-boat Special," inquires if the rest of us are jealous, and
then slowly swallows the concoction, rolling his eyes in ecstasy.
The Second Engineer is the only one who takes no trouble at all. He
follows the vulgar practice of sinking his healthy teeth into the two
halves and eats the pulp along with the juice.
The Old Man watches him with obvious disapproval.
I can't get over the Second Engineer. At first I decided he was
simply obstinate. But now I know that he's just a man devoid of natural
sensibility and equipped instead with a hide like an elephant's. He plays
up his imperturbability and calm, emphasizes his strength of character, 
when he's nothing but dull and thick-skinned. Also he's very slow to
think and just as slow to act--mentally and physically the exact opposite
of the Chief. God knows how he happened to hit on becoming an engineer,
and how--given his ponderous ineptitude--he wangled his way through the
courses and examinations.
That's the difference between him and the Old Man: the Old Man
pretends to be ponderous and indolent--while the Second Engineer really
is.
For a while we all concentrate on our lemons. As the squeezed or
sucked-out halves in the middle of the table turn into a mountain, the
steward appears and with a sweeping gesture of his arm collects them all
in his garbage pail. Then he mops up the vitamin-rich juice with an evilsmelling rag.
The ship's day still has about six hours to run. Our little gray
cells are on vacation. We simply sit and vegetate--like old-age
pensioners on a park bench. Actually all we lack are walking sticks to
lean on.
The Second Watch Officer has immersed himself in French newspapers.
He makes a practice of reading them all the way through, including the
advertisements. This time he's come across an item he can't understand.
Over a photograph of five girls is a large headline stating: "On a
couronné les rosiêres." It has to do with the bestowal of a prize founded
by a now-deceased lady of Nancy for virtuous daughters of that city. I
have to translate the whole article, including the songs of praise to the
virtue of the five chosen virgins. There is a touching description of how
the young ladies made a pilgrimage to the cemetery where the founder was
buried and adorned her grave on the Sunday when the prizes were given
out.
"How much per capita!"
"Two hundred francs apiece."
The Second Watch Officer is dumbfounded. "That's only about ten
marks, isn't it?" It takes him some time to draw the obvious conclusion.
"It's crazy. If the ladies had forgotten about their virtue, they'd have
shown a much tidier profit . . ."
"Nicely put."
There is a real library on board. In a locker on the side wall of
the Commander's cubbyhole. But it's far less popular than the detective
stories strewn around in the bow compartment. They have covers with
bloodthirsty scenes and titles such as _The Black Cotton Noose_, _Shot in
the Back_, _Three Shadows at the Window_, _Expiated Sins_, _The Innocent
Bullet_. Most of them have been passed from hand to hand so often that
the covers are in rags and the greasy pages are coming apart at the
seams. As of now, seaman Schwalle holds the record. On the last cruise
he's said to have got through twenty of them; this trip he's already up
to eighteen.
_Twenty-seventh Day at Sea_. A radio signal comes in. "To Wolf
Pack: Assume new advance patrol position. Course three hundred ten
degrees. Speed seven knots. Advance position will be reached on twentythird at o7.oo--BdU (Donitz) ." This means a new course, otherwise no
change.
A voice from the radio, ". . . unyielding martial spirit . . ."
"Shut it off!" The Chief shouts so loud that I jump.
"It seems as if they've got the hang of it now," says the Old Man
and looks at me grimly. "Just read through the last radiograms. 'Dive to
escape flyers--forced away--contact lost--dive to escape destroyers--
depth charges.' Always the same story. It's beginning to look as if the
balance has swung their way. I'd hate to be in the BdU's skin right now.
The Greatest Field Marshal of All Time, old Adolf, will make mincemeat
out of him if nothing comes through soon for the special announcement
basket."
"Well, after all, the balance can swing both ways."
The Old Man looks up. "Do you really believe. . . ?"
"Believe--sounds too much like church."
But the Old Man won't allow himself to be provoked.
"Where exactly are we?" Frenssen the diesel mechanic mate asks as
he comes off duty into the control room.
"Almost off the coast of Iceland."
"Well, what do you know? And I thought we were close to America."
I can only shake my head in amazement: typical of an engineroom
man. They don't give a damn where the boat is operating. It's the same on
all ships: engine-room people mend and tend their diesels and motors and
don't care whether it's day or night. They shy away from fresh air and
are baffled by the real sailors.
Our little seafaring band is riddled with caste divisions. The two
main ones are the sailors and the engineers. Upper deck and lower deck.
Below decks is subdivided into electricians and diesel men. In addition,
there's a control-room caste, a torpedo mechanics' caste, and the small
select caste of radio and sonar men.
It comes out that the bosun has some cans of pigs' feet hidden
among his supplies. Plus some cans of sauerkraut. The Commander
immediately orders a feast for the next day. "About time, too!" is all he
adds.
At noon the steward comes in with the steaming dishes, and the
Commander's face lights up as if this is Christmas dinner. He leaps to
his feet in anticipation, sniffing the fragrant steam that rises from the
rose-gray mound of pork on a great aluminum platter with the jagged bones
and white cartilage showing. The huge pieces are garnished with slices of
onion and pickle and arranged in the proper way--on a bed of sauerkraut.
"Beer wouldn't be bad with this," hints the Chief, knowing
perfectly well that only a single bottle per man is on board, to be
opened after a victory. But the Commander seems ready for anything today.
"Must celebrate holidays as they come. A half bottle of beer per man--
that's one full bottle between every two men!"
The news is flashed to the bow compartment and a roar goes up. With
a sharp jerk on the hinge of a locker the Chief opens the three bottles
that come to the Officers' Mess, and even before we can seize our
glasses, thick white froth streams out of the bottlenecks, like foam out
of a fire extinguisher.
"_Prost!_" the Commander lifts his glass. "Here's to the end of
this damn frigging around!"
The Chief drains his glass at a single gulp and tilts his head
right back to catch the last drops. Then he licks the foam from the 
inside of the rim and smacks his lips. He concludes with groans of sheer
pleasure.
When the bare bones of the feast have been carried away, the
steward appears once more. I can't believe my eyes. He's bearing a large
cake covered with black chocolate icing.
The Commander has the cook summoned immediately. The cook looks
confused but is ready with his excuse: the eggs had to be used; otherwise
they would have gone bad.
"How many cakes have you baked?"
"Eight, three slices per man!"
"And when?"
"Last night, Herr Kaleun."
Permission to grin can be read in the Old Man's face.
The debauch is followed by contented calm. The Old Man folds his
arms across his chest, hunches his head down against his shoulders, and
smiles amiably at us all.
The Chief settles himself properly in his corner of the sofa: an
intricate procedure. He takes as long as a dog to find the best position.
He has just managed it when word comes from above. "Chief to the bridge!"
Cursing, he struggles to his feet. He's got only himself to blame.
The minute anything of interest occurs topside he wants to be informed.
Only the day before he was angry because he hadn't been called when three
whales surfaced quite close to the boat.
I climb up after him and get my head above the edge of the hatch
just in time to hear him ask angrily, "What the devil is it then?" And
the Second Watch Officer replies obsequiously, "Thirteen white gulls flew
around the ship!" Even from behind them, I can tell that the bridge
guards are grinning. "They've just disappeared over the horizon," he
adds.
The Chief yells, "Just you wait!" Then he goes below to the control
room, obviously to plan revenge.
This time the Old Man saves him the trouble. While the Second Watch
Officer is still on duty he sounds the practice alarm. The boat cuts
under the surface before the Second Watch Officer has sealed the hatch
and he gets a tremendous dousing. As he climbs down into the control room
the Chief favors him with a happy smile. The Second Watch Officer
suddenly runs his hand in panic through his hair.
"Anything wrong?" the Commander asks solicitously.
The Second Watch Officer takes a deep breath. His mouth sags open
and he looks crushed. "My cap--on the bridge," he stutters. "I took it
off and hung it over the torpedo sight."
The Commander adopts the ingratiating tones of a headwaiter.
"Would the gentleman like us to surface immediately, reverse our
course, and undertake a search?"
The Second Watch Officer lets himself drop into a chair.
A fly darts aimlessly back and forth under the lamp above the chart
table. It's a puzzle. After all, flies are not albatrosses: They can't
just sail straight across the Atlantic. When we left Saint Nazaire it
wasn't the right time of year for flies--already too late in the season,
too cold, even for France. It's possible the fly was brought aboard as an
egg, pre-embryonic maybe, along with a thousand other ones that had less
luck in hatching. Perhaps our fly got into the torpedo tubes as a maggot. 
Perhaps it grew up in the bilges, constantly pursued by the inveterate
fanatical cleanliness of Number One. A true miracle, this fly's life, as
everything here is soldered shut. No pieces of cheese lying about. No
idea how it has survived.
One knows altogether too little about one's neighbor. Here we sit,
in the same boat--in the most literal sense of the word--and yet I have
no inkling of this fly's view of the world. I know nothing whatever about
the emotional life of the common housefly. As to the fruit fly, however,
I can at least give it its Latin name: _Drosophila melanogaster_. Shortwinged and long-winged _Drosophila_ were popular during my time in
school. We had a fair number of each in test tubes with mashed bananas.
The biology lecturer combined carefully counted specimens in a third
tube, but the results of the cross-breeding never checked out because we
secretly put a few additional short-winged flies in among the long-winged
ones. There stood the lecturer trying to juggle the numbers till we all
shouted, "Cheat!"
A fly's eye under the microscope--a true marvel. Flies have to be
caught from in front because they can't take off backward. Clear as
daylight. But this one isn't going to be caught. It's under my personal
protection. Perhaps it will even have babies, which in turn will have
more babies--one generation of shipborn flies after another, and I their
patron. And I'm not even that fond of the creatures.
We had barely fished my classmate Swoboda out of Binsen Lake when
those fat bluebottles began to settle in the corners of his eyes. Rigor
mortis had made him stiffen in a strange bent position with his knees
drawn up. The scent of acacias was almost overpowering in the Mecklenburg
summer heat. The rigor mortis finally wore off by evening, so we could
straighten him out. It was then that I discovered clots of yellow fly
eggs as big as peas in the corners of both his eyes.
I wonder if our ship's fly is getting ideas . . .
The First Watch Officer is instructing the petty officers again.
Through the clatter of dishes, which the steward considers an
indispensable part of his work, comes the fragment of a sentence. ". . .
to break the stranglehold. . ."
The Old Man gives a pained glance at the ceiling and raises his
voice to reach the bow compartment. "Are you settling accounts with
Albion again, First Watch Officer?"
The navigator has spotted and reported an object at thirty degrees.
The Commander climbs to the bridge the way he is, in sweater and drill
trousers. I at least get down my rubber jacket from its hook. Luckily I'm
wearing leather trousers and cork-soled shoes.
The flotsam is easily visible to the naked eye. The Commander
scrutinizes it for a good two minutes through his binoculars, then orders
the helmsman to steer straight for it. It rapidly grows until it becomes
a boat with its bow at an angle of two hundred degrees to us.
The Old Man sends the two lookouts below and mutters an
explanation: "No reason for them to have to look at it too."
It quickly becomes clear, however, that this move was unnecessary:
the lifeboat is empty.
The Old Man has both engines stopped. ". . . a bit closer,
navigator, and read the name."
"_Stel--la Mar--is_," he says slowly. The Old Man has the bridge
lookouts come on deck again. "Make a note for the log," he tells the
navigator, and gives course and engine orders.
After a couple of minutes we are back on our old course. I climb
down behind the Old Man. The lifeboat wallowing in the gray-green sea
must have stirred a memory in him. "A boatload of people once rowed
directly at us. Odd story . . ."
Well, out with it.
But he says nothing more for the time being. One of these days he's
going to drive me mad with all his foibles and five-minute delays. I have
to summon up all my self-control not to nag at him.
But I soon realize that the Old Man isn't putting on the usual act.
His face is troubled. He doesn't really know how to tackle his story.
Very well, we'll wait. I push my hands deep into my trouser pockets,
straighten my back, and shift my weight from one buttock to the other to
find the most comfortable position. We're certainly not pressed for time.
While I listen to the patter of the spray and the crash of the
waves, the Old Man finally begins to talk. "I once sank a steamer-- that
is, it was really her own speed that sank her--on my third patrol. The
torpedo tore away the bow and the steamer went down forward immediately;
it was still making so much headway that she dived like a U-boat. You'd
hardly believe it. Gone in a flash. Practically no survivors."
After a while, he adds: "Funny, it was actually a bad hit--but
that's the way it goes!"
I find myself thinking that it's not the story he'd really wanted
to tell, interesting and typical though it is: a factual account of his
professional experiences--curiosities and oddities--memorable departures
from the norm. But the real story? A lifeboat must have come into it
somewhere. I'll have to give him a lead. "So they never got to the
lifeboats at all. . . ?"
"_They_ didn't!"
I deprive him of the satisfaction of being prodded again and wait.
He snorts twice, quickly, then wipes his nose with the back of his hand.
"People shouldn't get so cynical, you know. .
Now it's up to me to indicate my interest by a turn of the head.
Nothing more. But he stares stolidly in front of him. That's all right
too. Don't rush. I wait for the pause to be completely played out before
I ask, as casually as I can, "What d'you mean? Why shouldn't they?"
The Commander chews a while longer on his pipe stem before he
starts to talk rather haltingly again. "I was just thinking about it--
had an experience once--men in a lifeboat, English, overwhelmed me with
thanks, and I'd just sunk their ship!"
I can no longer pretend indifference. "So?"
The Old Man takes a few more gurgling drags on his cold pipe, then
finally launches out. "The steamer was called Western Star. Beautiful big
ship. Ten thousand tons. Unescorted. Pure luck. By sheer chance we were
in the necessary forward position. I fired a spread of four, but only one
hit and it did astoundingly little damage. The scow simply settled a
little deeper in the water and slowed down. Then we scored another with
our stern tube. But she was still far from sunk. I could see the people
getting into the boats; then I surfaced.
"They'd launched two lifeboats. Steered directly toward us. Came
right within earshot and one of the men just couldn't stop thanking us
for being such splendid people. Took me quite a while to realize they
thought we weren't taking any further action so that they'd have a chance
to pull away from the steamer. Thanked us for our fair play. Truth was we
simply hadn't a torpedo in the tubes. They of course had no idea we'd
already let fly with three other fish. Our crew was slaving like crazy,
but reloading takes quite a bit of time. They thought we were postponing
the coup de grace--"
Half a glance sidewise and I see the Old Man's grinning. "That's
how you achieve nobility before you know what you're doing!"
The radio assigns us a new area. We're not to proceed to any
definite destination; by way of a change we're to chug along at a fixed
course and speed again. At a predetermined hour the boat is then to reach
the spot where the C-in-C's Operations Division wants us to close a gap
in the line. We will then proceed up and down as usual: half a day at
minimum speed northward, half a day south.
To my amazement the Old Man is optimistic again. "Something'll
happen yet . . . The dear Lord isn't going to desert his frigging little
Wolf Pack! Or don't you believe in the dear Lord God?"
"I do, of course I do," says the Chief, busily nodding his head.
"Of course I believe in the great Gas in the sky."
"You really are an evil bastard," mutters the Old Man. Which
doesn't bother the Chief a bit. Simply to get a rise, he announces that
he once had a vision of the Virgin Mary--"right on the net guard--soft
rose-pink with a shimmer of violet--but completely transparent--gorgeous!
The Lady pointed upward and blew out her cheeks!"
"She probably wanted you to volunteer immediately for the Air
Force. Balloon division."
"That wasn't it," the Chief replies dryly. "I'd forgotten to
ventilate with the diesels after we'd surfaced!"
The Old Man's trying not to laugh, which would mean losing the
game. "You should report that to the Pope. He'll canonize you on the
spot--only takes twenty-five years, as is usual with the Holy See!"
We're unanimous in our opinion that the Chief would make a handsome
saint. "Pious and noble," says the Old Man. "And even more ethereal than
he is now--an ornament to the Church."
As I go through the Quarters, the navigator is busy arranging his
locker. I sit down at the table and leaf through a seaman's handbook. The
navigator digs some photographs out of a worn wallet and hands them to
me: badly underexposed pictures of some children. Three little boys,
bundled up against the cold and sitting on a sled one behind the other in
descending order of size. In another picture they're in bathing suits.
There's an embarrassed smile on the navigator's face. His eyes are fixed
on my lips.
"Sturdy little fellows!"
"Yes, all boys."
But immediately he seems to feel that it's not the place for tender
emotions, here between these steel walls damp with condensation. He 
snatches the photographs back as if he'd been caught doing something
improper.
_Twenty-eighth Day at Sea_. The sun is the color of boiled chicken,
and the sky grayish-yellow, like chicken broth. Little by little the
horizon sinks into the mist; an hour later streamers of fog unfurl from
the water around the boat.
"Visibility zero!" the navigator reports from above. The Commander
gives the order to dive.
When the boat reaches 150 feet we make ourselves comfortable in the
control room. Legs up, boots propped against the chart chest. The
Commander is sucking and gurgling on his well-chewed pipestem. He seems
lost in thought. From time to time he nods to himself, far away in his
memories.
_Thirtieth Day at Sea_. The horizon is still empty. An east wind
has sprung up, bringing the cold. The guards on the bridge wrap
themselves up like mummies. Inside the boat the electric radiators are
on.
A radio message arrives. The Commander signs for it and hands it to
me.
"To Wolf Pack: Advance patrol area from point G to D to be occupied
on the twenty-eighth at o8.oo. Distance ten miles. Course two thirty
degrees. Speed eight knots--BdU."
The Commander unfolds the big transatlantic map and points with a
pencil to the position of our ship. "This is where we are-- and this is
where we have to go." His pencil moves far south. "Any way you look at
it, this means a good three days' sailing. The whole operation seems to
have been broken off. Something completely new. No idea what's behind it.
This way we'll be on a latitude with Lisbon."
"And out of the cold, thank god," the Chief breaks in, shivering.
Cookie bobs up. He's furious. "Shit--what a fuck-up! Five big cans
of sardines have leaked in the hold. Straight into the sugar!" He's
beside himself. "Goddam mess--now we can throw all the sugar away!"
"I think we'd better keep it," says Ario. "You never can tell--
sometime you may want sugar on your fish."
Three days pass at cruising speed, south-southwest, without the
guards on the bridge seeing a trace of the enemy; only empty casks and
drifting wooden cases.
The dull shuttling to and fro of a scouting patrol begins again.
The eternal sameness has made all sense of time long since disappear. I
don't know how long this frigging around has lasted already. Weeks?
Months? Or has the boat been driving around in the Atlantic for half a
year? Even the distinction between day and night seems to be getting
blurred.
Our supply of stories has long since run out. We try to cheer one
another up with stale jokes.
A new catchword of approval has spread through the boat like the
plague: "Bomfortunal." No one knows who invented this nonsense, but all
at once everything is "bomfortunal." There's also a new unit of 
measurement everywhere, the word "jet." At first it cropped up only at
breakfast time: "Just one more jet of coffee if you please." Then it
bobbed up as a unit of time. "Sure I'll do it, but just wait a jet." And
now the Chief asks me if I would please move a jet to one side.
I stay in the control room, sitting on the chart chest and trying
to read. After an hour, the Commander clambers heavily down from the
tower.
"Very pretty!" he says, lines of anxiety creasing his forehead. He
paces the room three or four times, nervous as a cat, then lowers himself
onto the chart chest beside me; instead of saying anything, he drags at
his pipe, long since extinguished. I put aside my book because I feel he
wants to talk. Wordlessly, we stare straight ahead.
I wait for him to speak first. He draws a tattered letter written
in green ink out of his pocket and strikes the paper a couple of times
with the back of his hand. "Here, I just came across this a little while
ago. What a crazy notion they must have of the way we live!" Green ink,
as I know, is the mark of the Commander's fiancée, the flyer's widow.
He thrusts out his lower lip and shakes his head. "End of subject,"
he says brusquely and gestures as if to wipe his own remarks off a
blackboard.
So, I think: no go.
Although we're sailing with open hatch, thanks to the improvement
in the weather, the petty officers' quarters stink to high heaven. Of
moldy bread, rotting lemons, rotting sausage, of oily exhaust from the
diesels, of wet foul-weather gear and leather boots, of sweat and semen.
The door is yanked open and a cloud of diesel stench comes in along
with the engine-room watch just relieved. Curses and imprecations. Locker
doors slammed shut. The diesel mechanic mate Frenssen suddenly bursts out
singing like a drunk. "Love and love alone drives our ship and steers it
home . .
Of course. Frenssen--as usual.
"We could use a nice beer right now!"
"Just cool enough, with a head as white as a lily--and then
another--and another--let them hiss down your throat. Christ!"
"Shut up! You're driving me insane!"
Today the sky is as slimy as sour milk. No motion. The water seems
to have become more viscid. The waves simply stoop over, round-shouldered
and weary; no more crests. Only occasional white veins showing in their
black-green. The Atlantic has turned one single color: this blackishgreen--not a sight anywhere to cheer us up.
Big ships at least offer the eye some color here and there. Funnel
insignia, white-painted ventilator hoods, red markings. But with us
everything is gray. Not a dab of color in the whole ship--only gray, and
even the same shade throughout. We ourselves blend into our background
superbly well: our skin is gradually turning the same pale, sickly gray.
No more bright pink cheeks like the ones children paint on the faces they
draw. Even the bosun, who was positively apple-cheeked when we sailed,
now looks as if he's just got up from a sickbed. Still, he certainly
hasn't lost his voice. Right now I can hear him bellowing at someone:
"Look with your goddam eyes, not your goddam asshole!"
All of us need a psychiatrist. He could thrash out the First Watch
Officer's elaborate affectations--some job! Also that trick of wrinkling
his nose, and his sensitive, oh-so-considerate smile.
The Second Watch Officer's laugh lines are another matter: they
would have to be retained; the baby face is still really in pretty good
shape. But the Chief would need intensive treatment, nervous and
overstrained as he is--the tic at the outer corner of his left eye, the
way his mouth twists, his habit of sucking in his cheeks, the meaningless
pursing of his lips, and above all his jumpiness--that sudden shudder at
the slightest noise. At least a small piece of the Second Engineer's
thick hide needs to be transplanted onto the Chief. And it might help the
Second Engineer as well. He needs a thinner skin.
Then there are the Old Man's compulsive noisy mannerisms:
scratching his beard, sucking on his pipe, making the bowl gurgle so that
it sounds like fat frying on a low fire, snorting through his nose.
Sometimes he forces spittle through a hole in his teeth till it hisses.
Johann is getting to look more and more like Christ. When he pushes
his mass of pale-yellow hair back off his high forehead, he only needs to
lower his eyes to produce a perfect likeness of the Holy Handkerchief.
Ensign Ullmann really worries me. At first I thought he looked full
of energy. Now it's vanished. I've seen him a few times crouched on his
bunk, sunk in gloom.
By radio we learn that Meinig's boat has sunk a refrigerator ship
of nine thousand gross registered tons, an unescorted vessel.
I stare at the radiogram: almost incredible! How the hell could he
have done it with his disabled boat? Meinig has reported--so Habermann is
alive too. Might have guessed it: Nothing's going to put _him_ out of
commission so quickly.
"He must have had plenty of luck," says the Old Man. "You can't
accomplish that sort of thing these days without it. If you're not lucky
enough to be in a forward position and be able to station yourself until
one of their scows runs right in front of your tubes. . . everything
that's going unescorted these days is going fast. Pursuit from astern is
pointless. A fast refrigerator ship simply outruns you. I've tried to
overtake one often enough--but it's been nothing but a waste of fuel
every time. Even if we run at maximum r.p.m. we barely make one to two
knots more than a fast, unescorted single vessel--and if she tacks in a
favorable direction and we're too slow in following, it's all over and
done with."
_Thirty-third Day at Sea_. The calendar says Wednesday. At eight in
the morning we receive a report: "Convoy headed west to be intercepted
Square Gustav Fritz."
Bent over the chart table, the Old Man emits a skeptical, "Well
now!" Five minutes of reckoning and he says, "Not exactly favorable, but
nevertheless--with a little luck--we might get there--just about." New
course, higher speed. Otherwise no change.
"It's about time we shoved a few tons toward the bottom," says the
Second Watch Officer, and immediately looks embarrassed, because he
realizes that in our present state of irritation his remark sounded much
too confident.
Midday. I climb up behind the First Watch Officer, who's just going
on duty. The air is heavy and stagnant. The sea has subsided under the
diffused light and covered itself with a gray skin that only occasionally
shows a small buckling or swelling: visual boredom that dampens our
spirits.
That evening, however, during the Second Watch Officer's watch,
color appears. Single flat banks of cloud stretched above the horizon
begin to glow like the fire in a forge. The whole sky quickly turns red
and the sea is overrun with the magnificent glow. The boat moves with
throbbing engines through this blazing hallucination. The whole bodywork
gleams. The foreship looks like a huge anvil. The faces of the bridge
guards are flooded with red. Two colors--red and black--would be enough
to paint all this: sea, sky, ship's hull, and the faces under the
sou'westers.
For a quarter of an hour sky and sea are in conflagration, then the
crimson glow fades from the clouds and they instantly return to a dim,
sulphurous gray. Now they look like mountains of ashes covering the
glowing heart of a small fire.
Suddenly a spot flames out in the gray wall directly ahead: bellows
seem to fan the glimmer into life. But again, a few minutes later, the
red glory shrinks; it gleams for a time like the mouth of a blast furnace
and finally is extinguished completely: the sun has sunk beneath the
horizon.
High above the parade of clouds, the heavens still hold a lingering
glow. Only very slowly does it grow thin and striated, and in its place
comes saffron-yellow, which gradually turns greenish and slowly sinks to
the horizon. The sea mirrors this poisonous color. It lies rigid,
paralyzed under its sickly-colored skin.
The Commander comes up and observes the sky. "Gaudy but not
beautiful!" he announces sourly.
When the Old Man isn't on the bridge, he spends hours like a hermit
behind his green curtain or on the periscope saddle in the tower.
Sometimes I hear the machinery start up. The Old Man is bored, and is
riding his carousel.
The crew doesn't hear a sound out of him from one day to the next.
They could well believe that the boat is voyaging the seas without a
commander. The Chief is another one who's badly affected by all this
frigging around. He's lost a lot of his liveliness, and looks as though
he'd put green eyeshadow under his eyes to turn himself into a demon. But
the greenish rings are genuine. For a long time now he's given up
puttering around--when he's not checking his engines, you seldom see more
of him than his bowed head with the bright line of the part in his hair:
he has succumbed to furious reading. He only lifts his head at mealtimes,
and the Commander says, "Good day!" to his pallid face. Sometimes he just
sits around and bitches.
Yet the unspoken understanding between the Chief and the Commander
persists despite all the irritability. Between the two of them all
tensions have apparently long since been worked out. Seven patrols
together already.
We're almost three thousand miles away from base. The boat has an
action radius of about seven thousand miles. But since we've burned up so
much fuel wallowing back and forth on patrol, there's only a small 
"margin." With such a reduced supply we could hardly be brought from any
great distance to attack a convoy. Our reserves would be barely
sufficient for the lengthy positional maneuvering at high speed that's
inevitable when attacking.
The First Watch Officer makes the Chief nervous, opening and
shutting his locker, clattering his keys, and scribbling in his colored
looseleaf notebooks. No one knows what he's putting down in them.
"He's memorizing the order of the cathouses for our return to
harbor," is the Chief's theory, as the First Watch Officer disappears in
the direction of the control room. One of his notebooks is lying on the
table. I can't resist the temptation to leaf through it. _Personnel
Management on a U-boat_ is the red title on the first page. I begin to
turn the pages and can't tear myself away.
_Point I: Peculiarities of U-boat Life_.
_Life on board for long periods is monotonous. One must be able to
endure long weeks of lack of success. When depth bombs are added to this,
it becomes a "war of nerves" which weighs principally upon the higherranking officers_.
More red pencil: _The morale of the crew is dependent on:_ and
underneath, point by point, in blue ink:
_1. The discipline of the crew_.
_2. The success of the Commander. If the Commander is successful,
then he may be a fool, but the crew will always love him more than an
unsuccessful one. But it is precisely the unsuccessful Commander who most
needs a high level of morale among his crew_.
Red pencil: _Discipline_; then more blue:
_The Commander's duty is to ensure that the spirit of the good
soldier predominates on his boat and that the opinions of the bad soldier
count for little. He must be like a gardener who pulls up the weeds and
tends the good plants_.
Another red title: _Quotation from a Speech by Lieutenant-Commander
L_.
_I am well aware that women can destroy the fighting morale of the
soldier, but I also know that they can strengthen their husbands in their
attitudes, and I have found that married men in particular return from
leave well rested to begin the new patrol against the enemy. One must
tell married petty officers what they should expect from a soldier's
wife. I was happy to have the opportunity to entertain the wives of most
of my men at a coffee party in my home, to come to know them and to be
able to tell them that a brave attitude on their part was expected. I
believe that many of them gained new backbone from this, and I have
requested my wife to write to them and to keep in touch with them_.
_Appeal must be made to the iron will to sustain health and
overcome small difficulties. If two soldiers are eligible for the Iron
Cross and only one Cross can be awarded, I prefer to give it to the man
who stays on board and continues to sail rather than to the one whose
good luck has made it possible for him to become a petty officer or a
sergeant and who must therefore return to land duty. Finally the Iron
Cross is no pilgrim's medal but a reward for bravery in the face of the
enemy which, once won, must immediately be earned again_.
I can hardly believe my eyes: so this is our First Watch Officer's
primer! I don't have to read far to come across another gem.
_On long patrols against the enemy a great deal of crockery is
broken by young soldiers. It is well known that admonishment does little
good, especially as the sea often makes serving difficult. I now have an
inventory of crockery made every week. If too much is missing, the
stewards must eat out of tin cans for three days. Another severe penalty
is the prohibition of smoking. For card lovers, being forbidden to play
for three days works wonders_.
Now comes a mimeographed page.
_It is a matter of honor, and I regard it as such, that etiquette
should be maintained on board. In harbor--more than at sea, naturally,
where it must suffice that someone shout "Attention" the first time the
Commander enters a room--the senior soldier present should report what is
being done, just as the Watch Officer reports on the bridge. In harbor,
during refitting, there must be an assembly for inspection at least once
a day. I lay especial emphasis on the raising of the flag. At sea the
condition of the lockers must also be checked from time to time and
neatness throughout the boat constantly maintained_ . . .
_At sea I have had one dead man and a couple of wounded. As
substitute I secured a volunteer ordinary seaman from a German steamer.
He was nineteen years old, had been abroad on German ships since he was
under fourteen. He came aboard with a straw hat on his head and said, "
'Day, Cap'n, I'm to come aboard here." He had no inkling of the outer
forms of soldiery. I turned him over for guidance to my best petty
officer, who taught him to walk and stand, and indoctrinated him with
basic principles. After fourteen days we swore him in. For this event we
dived, the bow compartment was adorned with flags, and we made the oathtaking a properly solemn occasion. The man had learned the oath by heart
in advance. In my address I told him about the duties of a German
soldier. The crew sat there in their brown tropical uniform shirts. In
honor of the day they had all given one another proper haircuts and had
decided in advance on the songs to accompany the celebration, so that the
singing really went off very well. In addition we presented the young
seaman with "The Duties of a Soldier." One of the men had written it out
in an elegant script_.
The heading _Feasts and Celebrations_ makes me particularly
curious.
_At Advent time every compartment glowed with electric Advent
candles on Christmas wreaths that had been made by twisting together
napkins and toilet paper painted green. The Christmas baking took
fourteen days and everyone had a taste of it, just as at home. On
Christmas Eve the festively bedecked bow compartment features a Christmas
tree made by ourselves. Saint Nicholas appears, wrapped in a simple
sheet, since we are in the tropics, and gives every soldier sweets and an
inscribed book, all appropriately accompanied by beautiful songs and
suitable speeches . . . on board, we say a great deal with music. If we
dive, then the off-duty watch learns about it by hearing the stirring
diving march that is played to our Chief when he's supervising the hydro
planes. And when the watch is to prepare for surfacing, they are alerted
by the march "Today We Plow Through the Open Sea_."
V FIRST ATTACK
The radioman hands a message out of the shack. Nothing on his face
but that perpetual, harmless grin.
The First Watch Officer, all importance, puts the decoding machine
on the table, lays the radioman's strip of paper beside him, cocks his
head first to one side and then to the other like a rooster looking for a
kernel of corn, checks the alignment, and finally taps the keys.
During this procedure the Chief manages to look as bored as a
British racing-stable owner. The Second Watch Officer, who's off duty,
doesn't even look up from his book. I join in the general pretense of
indifference.
The First Watch Officer has barely decoded the last word when the
Commander snatches the strip of paper out of the machine-- with an
eagerness that contradicts his look of contempt--reads it with a grim
expression, gets up and heads for the control room without saying a word.
Through the circular door I see him carefully adjusting the lamp over the
chart table.
The Chief and I exchange pregnant glances.
"Aha!"
I control my curiosity for a suitable interval before I go into the
Control room after the Commander. The navigator is there already-- as if
conjured up by magic.
The Old Man's torso is bent over the sea chart; in his left hand he
has the radiogram, in his right the dividers. He doesn't look at us.
"Not too bad," he murmurs finally. Then he silently pushes the
radio message over to me. "o8io hours convoy sighted Square Bruno Max.
Steering northerly course. Driven off by flyers. Enemy out of sight--UR."
The Commander points the dividers at Square Bruno Max. Not far from
our present position.
"At a rough guess, we should be able to get there in twenty-four
hours at top speed."
Now we have to wait and see whether UR establishes contact again:
only then would we be ordered in pursuit of the convoy.
"Maintain course and speed for the time being."
The next couple of hours are rife with speculation: "Looks like the
convoy's heading for America. But then it could always be Gibraltar.
Can't be sure," I hear the navigator say.
"UR--that's Bertold," says the Old Man. "Good man. No beginner. He
won't let himself be shaken off so easily . . . they must have put to sea
a week after us; they were having trouble with their periscope."
An inviting gesture to me to come and sit beside him on the chart
chest. Expectancy and excitement have made him cheerful. "Always these
shitty airplanes," he says. "Lately they've been working in hunting units
along with destroyers, and once a pack like that gets its teeth into you.
. . There used to be hardly any flyers around here--those were the days,
all right. All you had to do was keep watch on the surface and you knew
pretty well what you had to reckon with."
The control-room mate, who is standing at a little desk making
entries on the diving log, pauses in his writing.
"They're trying everything to shake us off. For a long time now
they've stopped stationing their destroyers close to the herd of
shipping. They've got the hang of it. The destroyers patrol at top speed
at a considerable distance from their precious steamers. That way, even
if we make contact at the farthest limit of visibility, they can force us 
to withdraw, or go underwater. As for their sweepers, they have them
cavorting around way ahead of the convoy . . . there's just no more
brotherly love these days. They've even managed to rebuild big freighters
as auxiliary aircraft carriers. And they form protective groups of small
carrier-based planes and destroyers that really make things hot for us.
All they need is proper training in precise coordination and it's
guaranteed that any boat spotted by one of their busy bees will be worked
over by the destroyers till their precious freighters have run so far the
enemy hasn't a ghost of a chance of finding them again. Which means you
do nothing but beat yourself to death and burn up a hellish load of
fuel."
The Old Man seems completely relaxed. Even talkative. "We really
should have taken the offensive much earlier--before the Tommies woke up
and got themselves organized. Still, when war broke out we had only
fifty-seven boats, and no more than thirty-five of them were suitable for
the Atlantic. Obviously nowhere near enough to blockade England. Just a
tentative sort of stranglehold. And the arguments! To risk everything on
U-boats or to build battleships as well. We were never really trusted by
the old fogeys in the Imperial Navy. They wanted their proud fleet,
regardless of whether battleships were still any use or not. We're what
you might call a con-serv-a-tive club!"
Later, as I am stretching my legs in the control room, a new
radiogram comes in. "09.20 hours dived to avoid aircraft. One hour
underwater. Enemy convoy in sight again. Square Bruno Karl. Position of
enemy uncertain--UR."
"I tell you, he's not going to let 'em slip through his fingers.
Navigator, does the convoy seem to be running on a parallel course?"
This time the Commander takes only a few minutes at the chart
table, then turns abruptly and orders, "Course two hundred seventy
degrees. Engines full speed ahead!"
Orders are acknowledged. The engine telegraph rings. A heavy
shudder runs through the boat, and the pounding of the engines rises to a
fierce roar.
Oho, so the Old Man's going to get into it! He isn't even waiting
for an order from Kernével.
The roar of the diesels swells, sings in a higher key, then once
again sounds dull and rumbling, almost smothered: the diesel music of the
sea. The muffled tone means a big wave meeting the bow, the clear singing
that the boat is shooting through a trough.
Everywhere men are at work reinspecting the connections, as they
have so often before. They do it of their own accord, inconspicuously,
almost surreptitiously.
"Permission to come on the bridge?"
"_Jawohl!_"
First I look at the wake. It's boiling-white, the huge, thick,
gleaming train of a dress stretching as far as the eye can see, thinning
to bottle-green at the horizon in individual tattered strands, as if it
had parted at the seams. Both sides are banded in light green, the shade
of translucent beer-bottle glass. Over the gratings drift bluewhite fumes
from the diesels. I turn toward the bow and get struck in the face by a
whiplash of spray. Sea head-on and the diesels at full speed--should have
expected what it would be like.
Water drips from my nose.
"Congratulations," says the Second Watch Officer.
I squint to look at our foreship from the protection of the
bulwark. We're tearing along so hard that the bow is throwing out sheets
of water, and broad streaks of foam boil up around the sides.
The Commander's hands are thrust deep into the pockets of his
leather trousers. His once-white, battered cap with its greentarnished
insignia is pulled far down over his face. He's searching sky and water
with narrowed eyes. Again and again he urges the bridge guards to keep a
sharp lookout.
He doesn't go below, even to eat.
A full hour passes before he climbs down to have a look at
developments on the chart. I go too.
The navigator is still busy calculating.
A new small pencil cross on the hydrographic chart shows the last
position of the enemy. Now our own chart allows us to read off his course
and speed. Another pencil cross: the intersection of his assumed course
with ours. Our thoughts are drawn compulsively to this point, like a
compass needle to the north.
Hour after hour goes by. Fuel racing through the pipes.
"This is burning up a pretty load!" I hear Dorian say. The Chief is
supposed to be out of earshot.
The Second Watch Officer comes in with a new radiogram.
"Aha!" says the Commander with obvious anticipation. He even
condescends to read it aloud. "To UA: Proceed immediately at top speed
against convoy reported by UR--BdU."
"Watch Officer: Steer three hundred forty degrees. Further orders
to follow." The repetition of the command echoes back from the helmsman
in the tower.
On the chart the Commander points out first the position of the
convoy, then ours. "We ought to be there tomorrow morning around six
o'clock."
Bertold dare not attack now. It's more important to maintain
contact--not to let the enemy escape, to send short signals until other
boats can assemble from the far reaches of the Atlantic.
"Surely it's going to work," I comment cautiously.
"No wedding reception before the church service," the Commander
warns me.
Questioning faces appear in the round opening of the doorway. To
their great amazement the men see their Commander hopping around and
around the control room, from one foot to the other, like a bear with a
sore head.
"You see!" says Dorian. "Just what I always suspected--"
The Commander takes the microphone of the public address system to
announce to all compartments: "The boat is operating against a convoy
located by UR. Starting at six tomorrow morning we can anticipate
contact." A crackling in the loudspeaker. Nothing more.
The Commander tilts his head way back. His elbows are propped
between the spokes of the hydroplane handwheel. He frees his right arm,
takes the pipe out of his mouth, makes an all-embracing gesture with the
stem, and begins abruptly, "Marvelous thing, boat like this. Some people
are against technology. Supposed to stultify you, impair your drive,
nonsense like that!"
He pauses, and a good ten minutes pass before he takes up the
thread again. "But there's nothing more beautiful than a U-boat like
this. Don't mean to sound fanatical--god forbid!"
He takes a deep breath and produces a few snorting sounds in selfmockery, then goes on talking. "Sailing ships are marvelous too. Nothing
in the world has more beautiful lines than a sailing ship! Served on a
three-master years ago. Her bottom yard was forty feet above the deck. A
good hundred and seventy all the way up. In bad weather no one wanted to
climb up to the skysail. And if anyone fell you could hear the impact all
over the ship. Happened three times on a single voyage. Special kind of
thud--dull but penetrating--and everyone immediately knew what had
happened."
The Old Man pauses and lets us listen to the gurgling of his cold
pipe.
"Wonderful ship, that. Each hold as big as a church--the nave of a
church--probably why they call them naves. Usually had sand as ballast. A
good deal of it was different from this." The Old Man grins. "For one
thing, we could stretch our legs properly!"
For a while the fist with the pipe remains poised in mid-air. Then,
without putting the pipe away, he pushes his cap far back on his head.
His tangled blond hair protrudes from under the peak, giving him a
daredevil look. "Nothing I love more than the sound of these diesels
running flat out. And some people cover their ears if they so much as
hear them!" The Old Man shakes his head. "There're some who can't even
stand the smell of gasoline. My fiancée can't abide the smell of leather.
Funny!"
He suddenly clams up, like a boy who's let something slip.
No appropriate question occurs to me, so we both sit in silence
staring at the floor plates. Then the Chief appears to ask whether the
port diesel can be stopped for fifteen minutes. Reason: suspected damage
to the crank shaft.
The Commander suddenly makes a face as if he'd bitten into a lemon.
"Tsch, Chief--if we have no choice."
The Chief disappears, and a few moments later the tone of the
diesels slackens. The Commander bites his lower lip.
Only when a new radio message is handed to him does his face light
up again. "Last observed position of enemy Square Bruno Anton--UR."
The second watch assembles in the control room and makes ready.
Safety belts are no longer in use. As the big hand of the clock
approaches twelve, the four men climb up. "Course three hundred forty
degrees, starboard diesel running full speed--port diesel stopped," the
helmsman reports as the watch changes.
The lookouts who have been relieved come down. Their faces are the
color of boiled lobster. The navigator, who is the last to descend into
the control room, comes to attention. "Reporting from watch. Light cloud
cover from northwest. Wind northwest to west. Veering counterclockwise.
Shipping a lot of water due to high speed."
As though in confirmation, a surge of water lands on the floor
plates.
"Thanks." The four salute, then shake themselves like dogs. Water
from their rubber coats flies all over the control room. One of them
ventures a question. "How far now from the scows?"
"Still a whole jet!" replies the control-room mate.
The steward comes through. Seems to be feeling his oats, tripping
along like a headwaiter. Surprising he hasn't got a napkin clasped under
his arm.
After the steward it's the cook on his way to the bow compartment.
He has the ingratiating smile of a tavern-keeper.
"Pure play-acting today," says the Old Man, not noticing that he
himself is performing the leading role as he sits in his corner
benevolently surveying his children like a contented father.
It's as though we had broken out of a clinch and could breathe
freely again. No more aimless searching, no more patroling up and down in
the same area, a clear course at last, full speed ahead toward the enemy.
The only one who takes no joy in the diesel roar and the hissing of the
waves is the Chief. "There's a lot of my oil gone to hell," he growls
with a look of disgust. But even he sounds satisfied when he announces
that the port diesel is ready again.
"Fine, Chief, good to hear it!" says the Old Man. "Now let's see
what you can do with your second wind."
I move off in the direction of the bow compartment. As soon as I
open the door I notice that the excitement has taken hold here too. The
cook appears behind me with a big pitcher of lemonade. The off-duty watch
gathers around him like a horde dying of thirst.
"Here's hoping something comes of it all this time," Little
Benjamin proclaims stoutly, almost before he's finished drinking.
"I can wait!" says Schwalle, hard-nosed.
"Well, I'm fed up with this frigging around!"
"Hero!" jeers someone out of the half darkness farther forward.
"Don't let your courage run away with you, little one. You're okay
the way you are!"
"You've probably been swilling funny water again," says the same
voice from the darkness.
"Something not suit you? These negative types give me a pain in the
ass."
For a while there's nothing but the sleepy thrumming of radio music
to be heard over the fluctuating roar of the waves. All at once the
conversation turns to the reported convoy. "If the Old Man wants to get
anything done, he's got to get there tonight," the torpedo mechanic
asserts.
"Why's that?" the bridge johnny asks.
"Because tomorrow is Sunday, you imbecile!" Little Benjamin
sputters. "It's in the Bible. Thou must honor the Sabbath and not violate
thy sister."
I feel as if I'm in a road company. Our seagoing amateur
theatricals are a play about imperturbability, coolness, and heroism; the
actors are also talking away their fear.
The sea grows rougher during the night. I can feel it clearly as I
doze.
Shortly after five o'clock I climb up to the bridge. The Second
Watch Officer is in charge. The Commander's there too. Morning half
light. The boat buffets the dark waves. Streamers rise like smoke from
their crests, and more watery smoke fills the valleys between. An agony
of watchfulness: if the convoy has tacked in this direction, we may
intercept its course at any instant.
The sun rises astern, a milky disk. Ahead of us the sky is blocked
by black walls of cloud. Very slowly they free themselves from the 
horizon as though drawn out of a sail loft: patches that are no further
use. It remains misty.
"Damned poor visibility," growls the Second Watch Officer.
Soon more dark cloud cover comes creeping toward us just above the
water, draped like a dingy curtain. Immediately in front of us it begins
to fray out. The strands are black-gray like the clouds themselves, and
stretch down to the water. The horizon disappears.
Another cloud a few points to port can no longer hold its burden of
rain. Before long the trailing fringes of the two come together. Already
a few drops are falling. They make little pecking sounds on our
sou'westers and jackets. The rain front swells out on both sides. Larger
and larger sections of the horizon vanish into the blinding mist. A dark
net is being thrown around the boat; it's already closing behind us; now
there's no range of vision at all.
Intently, inch by inch, we search the gray curtain for some sign of
the enemy. Every gray wall may hide a destroyer, every racing cloud a
diving plane.
Spray comes flying over the bulwark; my tongue tastes of salt. My
sou'wester is a roof. The rain pounds down on it, and I can feel the
sharp blows of each drop on my scalp. Our blue-green oilskins glitter in
the wet, and rain shoots down the folds in torrents. We stand like blocks
of stone while the sky empties itself over us.
Must be seven o'clock now. We should have made contact with the
convoy around six.
I hear Dorian cursing. "This weather is for the birds. I'm fed to
the teeth with it!" The Second Watch Officer immediately turns on him to
shout, "Look out, man, you're meant to be on watch."
Despite the Turkish hand towel wrapped around my neck, the water
has soaked down as far as my belly.
I climb inside, and the control-room mate greets me expectantly. To
his disappointment I produce nothing but a sigh of resignation. I go off
to change my clothes and put the wet things in the E-room.
"Wind northwest five, sea running four, sky overcast, visibility
poor," runs the text prepared for the war log. The rolling of the boat is
getting steadily worse.
The last reported contact is now three hours old. "Enemy changing
course to one hundred ten degrees. Proceeding in wide formation. Four
columns. About thirty steamers." Since then no further news. Our diesels
are still running full speed.
I hear the sea firing salvo after salvo against the tower. We seem
to be caught in the aftermath of a high groundswell and the wind is
whipping it up again.
At eight o'clock the watch is changed.
"What's it look like?" Isenberg asks the Berliner.
"Well, the light rain's gone. Now it's just pouring buckets!"
"Cut the crap--what's really happening?"
"Blown itself out--nothing doing--fog."
Suddenly the Old Man begins swearing. "Damn and fuck this filthy
weather! Always just when we don't need it. Could easily go racing past
and miss them by a couple of miles. Goddam pea soup!" And then, "If only
Bertold would make a move!"
No new signal arrives.
Without another contact report we're up the creek: our calculations
were never that accurate to begin with. The boat that made contact can't 
have had the chance to take an astronomical fix in the last forty-eight
hours. The sky must certainly have been as constantly overcast for them
as for us. So they've reported a position arrived at by dead reckoning.
Even if the navigator on Bertold's boat has calculated exactly, he can
only guess at the displacement of the boat by the sea and the wind.
Silence from headquarters. Has Bertold been forced to dive?
Surprised by a destroyer?
No chance of getting a sighting from the other boats sent after the
convoy. After all, they were farther away than we were; it's natural
enough that they have nothing to contribute. But Bertold, the contact
boat--surely he ought to know something.
"Must be stuck in the same pea soup," says the Old Man.
The engines throb steadily. There isn't much for the Chief to do
now. "This weather must be giving our colleagues a bad time."
It takes me a while to realize he's sympathizing with the crews of
the enemy ships. Then he adds, "Those destroyer crews really take a
beating--tin cans."
He sees my startled expression and continues: "It's true. Our own
destroyers no longer put out to sea if there's the slightest storm cloud
outside the harbor wall."
The control room is filling up. Everyone with any kind of
legitimate excuse to be there seems to have appeared. In addition to the
Commander, the navigator, and the control-room mate with his two
assistants, I see the First Watch Officer, the Second Engineer, and
Dorian.
"We've had it! Take it from me!" says Dorian, but so softly that
only I can hear. The others are silent--they seem to be suddenly struck
dumb.
The Old Man jerks up his head and orders, "Prepare to dive!"
I know what he has in mind: a sonar search. The sounds of enemy
engines and propellers carry farther in deep water than we can possibly
see on the surface.
The usual series of orders and maneuvers follows. I glance at the
depth manometer. The pointer begins to turn and suddenly the roaring of
the waves ceases.
The Commander has the boat level off at a hundred feet and crouches
in the passageway beside the sound room. The face of the hydrophone
operator, lit from below, looks absolutely expressionless. His eyes are
empty. With the headpiece clamped over his ears, he's conducting a search
in every direction to pick out some trace of the enemy from the general
underwater sounds.
"No target?" The Commander asks again and again. And after a while,
impatient and tense, "Nothing at all?"
For a moment he presses one of the earpieces to his own head, then
passes the instrument to me. I hear nothing but a surging hum like the
noise from a conch shell when you press it against your ear.
The boat has been running underwater for an hour. No hydrophone
directional bearing. "That's the way it goes," murmurs the Chief, who
keeps running his fingers nervously through his hair.
"Fucked!" says someone half under his breath.
The Commander is about to pull himself to his feet and give the
order to the Chief to surface when he catches sight of the hydrophone 
operator: eyes closed, mouth tight shut, and face contracted as if in
pain. He swings his equipment slowly right, then left. Finally he moves
the wheel a fraction of an inch: a noise! Struggling to control his
excitement, he announces, "Sound bearing sixty degrees-- very weak!"
The Commander straightens up with a jerk and grabs one of the
earpieces. His face takes on an intense expectancy.
Suddenly the operator gives an almost imperceptible shudder and the
Commander sucks his lips between his teeth.
"Depth charges! They're raking somebody. What's the bearing now?"
"Seventy degrees--moving astern--long way off!" The Commander
climbs through the circular door into the control room. His voice is
harsh: "Course fifty degrees! Prepare to surface!" And then to the
navigator, "Note for the war log: 'Despite condition of weather decided
to proceed on surface against convoy.'"
The weather has grown even worse. Low-hanging squalls of rain
darken the sky around us. All the daylight is gone: It might as well be
evening. Wind-driven spray covers the watery landscape with a pale mist.
The boat's rolling heavily. Waves coming from the port beam. Water
spurts through the open hatch, but we have to keep this open because the
enemy may surprise the boat at any moment.
The propellers race, the diesels are running flat out. The
Commander is rooted to the bridge. Under the rain-slicked, downturned
brim of his sou'wester he searches the sea. He stands motionless; only
his head pivots slowly from side to side.
After a quarter of an hour I climb down to inspect developments on
the chart table. The navigator is hard at work calculating. Without
lifting his eyes he says, "Here we are--and here's where we can expect
the convoy. Unless it's tacked again."
Standing around aimlessly embarrasses me. I already have my left
hand on the aluminum ladder when I tell myself that all this climbing up
and down makes me look nervous. Just take it easy: relax. Whatever's
happening, I'll find out in good time. How late is it really? Past
twelve? Well, I just have to act as though none of this is out of the
ordinary, so I peel off my wet things.
I sit in the mess, trying to read a book, until the steward finally
brings in plates and cups for lunch. The Commander doesn't appear.
We've scarcely sat down at the table--the Chief, the Second
Engineer, and I--when there's a roar from the control room. The Chief
looks up quickly. A report comes down from the bridge. "Masthead off the
port bow!"
Almost without thinking, I'm halfway to the control room: the
convoy.
I'm ahead of the Chief to the bridge. The rain is worse. My sweater
is immediately soaked from spray and the downpour. I was in such a hurry,
I forgot to grab my oilskin from its hook.
I hear the Commander. "Hard to starboard. Steer one hundred eighty
degrees!"
A bridge guard hands me his binoculars unasked. I start searching
the same area as the Commander. Gray streamers of rain. Nothing else.
Holding my breath, I force myself to stay calm, search the righthand edge
of this banner of water and then swing my glasses very slowly across it
to the left. There--in the streaks of gray--a hairbreadth line that 
immediately disappears again. An illusion? Imagination? I take a deep
breath, relax my knees, give myself a gentle shake, balance the glasses
on my fingertips. The boat heaves under me. I lose my bearings, then
reorient myself by the Commander. There it is again.
It trembles and dances in the glasses. A mast! No doubt of it. But-
-a mast and no accompanying plume of smoke? Only this single hairline?
Hard as I look, I can find nothing else; it seems to be pushing its way
slowly over the horizon.
Every steamer is supposed to have a plume of smoke that betrays it
long before its radio masts appear. So this can't be a steamer.
Hell and damnation--where is it? Now I have it again. I should be
able to see it with the naked eye. I put down my glasses and search--
there it is all right!
The Commander is chewing his lower lip. He takes up the binoculars
again, muttering half to himself--"Shit! Destroyer!"
A minute goes by. My eyes are glued to the thin line above the
horizon. I'm choking with excitement.
No more doubt about it: It's a radio mast, so the destroyer is
coming directly at us. Without slow engines there's no chance we can get
away on the surface.
"They must have seen us. Goddammit!" The Commander's voice hardly
changes at all as he gives the alarm.
One bound and I'm down the tower hatch. Boots ringing on the floor
plates. The Commander is the last in. He pulls the hatch shut. Even
before it's completely sealed he orders, "Flood!"
He stays in the tower. In a steady voice he calls instructions down
to the control room. "Proceed at periscope depth!" The Chief balances the
boat. The needle of the depth manometer stops, then slowly moves backward
over the scale. Dufte is beside me, breathing heavily in his wet
oilskins. Zeitler and Bockstiegel are sitting in front of the buttons of
the hydroplane controls, their eyes glued to the water column in the
Papenberg. The First Watch Officer bends forward to let the rainwater run
off the brim of his sou'wester.
No one says a word. Only the electric hum of the motors can be
heard, as if through padded doors, coming from the stern.
From above us, the voice of the Commander finally breaks the
silence. "Report depth."
"Seventy feet!" from the Chief.
The water column in the Papenberg sinks slowly: the boat is rising.
The lens of the periscope soon comes clear.
The boat is not yet on an even keel, so the Chief orders water
pumped from the forward trim tank toward the stern. Slowly the boat
attains the horizontal. But it doesn't stay there. The waves roll us in
all directions. Sucking, dragging, pushing. Periscope observation is
going to be damned difficult.
I listen intently, waiting to hear from the Commander, when the
hydrophone operator reports, "Destroyer hard on the starboard beam!"
I pass the report up.
"Acknowledged." Then, just as dryly, "Man battle stations!"
The operator is bent out of the sound room into the passageway, his
eyes wide and blank. The direct lighting makes his face a flat mask, the
nose simply two holes.
Along with the Commander, the operator is now the only one in
contact with the world outside our steel tube. The Commander can see the 
enemy, the operator hears him. The rest of us are blind and deaf.
"Auditory contact stronger--moving slowly astern!"
The Commander's voice sounds choked. "Flood tubes one to four!"
Just as I thought: The Old Man is going to take on the destroyer.
He wants a red pennant. The only thing still missing from his collection.
When he ordered periscope after the alarm, I knew for sure.
His voice comes down again. "To control room--Chief--hold our exact
depth!"
How can he possibly do it, I ask myself, in this rough sea? The
muscles in the Chief's gaunt face tense and relax rhythmically. He looks
as if he's chewing gum. If the boat rises too far, and the upper part of
the hull breaks the surface--disaster: it will betray us to the enemy.
The Commander is astride the periscope saddle in the narrow space
between the periscope shaft and the tower wall, his face pressed against
the rubber shell, his thighs spread wide to grip the huge shaft. His feet
are on the pedals that enable him to spin the great column and his saddle
through 360 degrees without making a sound; his right hand rests on the
lever that raises and lowers it. The periscope motor hums. He's lowering
it a little, keeping its head as close to the surface of the water as he
possibly can.
The Chief is standing immobile behind the two men of the bridge
watch who are now operating the hydroplanes. His eyes are glued to the
Papenberg and its slowly rising and falling column of water. Each change
in it means the boat is doing the same.
Not a word from anyone. The humming of the periscope motor sounds
as if it's coming through a fine filter; the motor starts, stops, starts
again, and the humming resumes. The Commander ups periscope for fractions
of a second and immediately lets it sink below the surface again. The
destroyer must be very close.
"Flood tube five." The order is a whisper.
It's passed on softly to the main motor room. We're in the midst of
battle.
I sink down onto the frame of the circular door. The whispered
report comes back from astern, "Tube five ready to fire when torpedo door
opened."
So--all tubes are flooded. All that's needed is to open the doors
and release a blast of compressed air to send them on their way. The
Commander wants to know the position of the helm.
Suddenly I notice that I still have a half-chewed bit of bread in
my mouth. Mushy bread and sausage fat. It's beginning to taste sour.
I have the feeling that I've lived all this somewhere before.
Images shift about in my mind, jostling, overlaying one another, merging
into new combinations. My immediate impressions seem to be being
transmitted by a complicated circuit to my brain center from which they
re-emerge into my consciousness as memories.
The Old Man's mad--attacking a destroyer in this sea.
But it has its advantages too. Our periscope can't be all that
visible. The streamer of foam that would betray it must be hard to
distinguish among the cresting waves.
The drip in the bilge is deafening. Sounds as if it's coming over a
loudspeaker. Lucky that everything's worked so far: no problem
maintaining depth. The Chief was well prepared, had it all figured out.
If the Old Man decides to fire, the Chief must flood at once to
make up for the weight of the torpedo. Otherwise the boat will rise. A 
torpedo weighs three thousand pounds--so an equivalent weight of water
has to be taken on for each one launched. Multiplied by the number of
torpedoes fired--it's a lot.
Not a word from the Commander.
It's very difficult to hit a destroyer. Shallow draft. Easily
maneuverable. But score a hit, and it's gone in a flash, blown away. The
explosion of the torpedo, a geyser of water and torn steel, then nothing.
The Commander's steady voice comes down. "Open torpedo doors.
Switch on tubes one and two! Enemy course fifteen. Bow left. Direction
sixty. Range one thousand!"
The Second Watch Officer puts the figures in the calculator. The
bow compartment reports torpedo doors opened. The First Watch Officer
relays the message softly but distinctly. "Tubes one and two ready to
fire!"
The Commander has his hand on the firing lever and is waiting for
the enemy to move into the crosshairs.
If only we were able to see!
Imagination runs riot in this silence. Visions of catastrophe: a
destroyer swinging until it's at angle zero. The foaming bow, the white
bone in its teeth, towering over us, ready to ram. Staring eyes, the
sharp rending of metal, jagged edges of steel, green surge of water
through fissures like opened stopcocks.
The voice of the Commander, as sharp as a descending whiplash.
"Close torpedo doors. Dive to two hundred feet. Fast!"
The Chief is only a fraction of a second behind him. "Hard down
both--both engines full ahead! All hands forward!"
Loud confusion of voices. I flinch, press myself to one side, have
trouble staying on my feet. The first man is already forcing his way
through the circular door aft, staggers, recovers his balance and rushes,
half crouched, past the sound room toward the bow.
Wide-open questioning eyes fixed on me. Chaos: slipping, stumbling,
hurrying, staggering. Two bottles of lemonade come tumbling in from the
petty officers' mess and smash noisily against the wall of the control
room.
Both hydroplanes are hard down. The boat is already distinctly bow
heavy, but the men keep coming from astern. They slide through the tilted
control room as if it's a chute; one falls full length, cursing.
Only the engine room personnel are left in the after part of the
ship. The floor slips away beneath me. Fortunately I manage to grab the
periscope stanchion. The sausages swing out at an angle from the wall. I
hear the Old Man's voice from above us, cutting through the scuffling and
stamping of boots. "Depth charges next!" He sounds perfectly calm, as
though passing on a piece of casual information.
He climbs down with exaggerated deliberation, as if it's an
exercise. Traverses the slope, hanging on to both sides, and props one
buttock on the chart chest. His right hand grasps a water pipe for
support.
The Chief slowly levels the boat out and orders, "Man diving
stations!" The seamen who rushed forward now work their way back hand
over hand up the slope. The sausages act like a scale: we're still a good
thirty degrees bow heavy.
_Rrabaum!--Rrum!--Rrum!_
Three crashing sledgehammer blows spin me around. Half stunned, I
hear a dull roar. \Vhat is it? Fear claws at my heart: that roaring! 
Finally I identify it: it's water pouring back into the vacuum created in
the sea by the explosion.
Two more monstrous explosions.
The control-room mate has hunched his head into his shoulders. The
new control-room assistant, the Bible Scholar, staggers and seizes hold
of the chart table.
Another explosion, louder than the rest.
The lights go out. Darkness!
"Auxiliary lighting gone," someone calls.
The orders from the Chief seem to come from a distance. Pocket
flashlights cut whitish cones in the darkness. Someone calls for a damage
report. The section leaders' replies come through the speaking tubes.
"Bow compartment in order!"--"Main motor room in order!"--"Engine room in
order!"
"No leakage," says the navigator. His voice is as matter-of-fact as
the Commander's.
Before long, two double explosions make the floor plates dance.
"Pump out torpedo cell one!" With a sharp hum the bilge pump
springs into action. As soon as the roar of the detonations has subsided,
the pump will be stopped again. Otherwise it could supply a bearing to
the enemy's hydrophones.
"Raise bow!" The Chief to the hydroplane operators. "Boat's in
balance," he reports to the Commander.
"There'll be more," says the Old Man. "They actually saw our
periscope. Amazing--with the sea running this high."
He looks around. No trace of fear on his face. There's even an
undertone of scorn in his voice. "Now it's psychological warfare,
gentlemen."
Ten minutes pass; nothing happens. Suddenly a violent explosion
shakes the whole boat. Then another and another. It quivers and groans.
"Fifteen!" counts the navigator. "Sixteen, seventeen, eighteen!"
The Chief stares at the needle of the depth manometer, which jumps
a couple of points at each detonation. His eyes are huge and dark. The
Commander's are closed to obliterate his surroundings and concentrate on
his calculations: our own course, enemy course, ways of escape. He must
react with lightning speed. He's the only one among the lot of us who's
actually fighting. Our lives hang on the correctness of his orders.
"Hard a-port!"
"Helm hard a-port!"
"Hold zero bearing!"
The Commander never stops calculating. The basic factors in his
reckoning change with each report; he must determine an escape route
according to the strength of the sound of propellers and the approach
angle of the destroyer. His senses no longer supply him with any
immediate information; he must guide the boat like a pilot flying blind,
his decisions based on indications given him by the instruments.
Against closed eyelids I see the gray-black cans twisting heavily
as they shoot downward from the launchers, plunge into the water, spin
lazily into the depths leaving bubbling trails, and then explode in the
darkness--blazing fireballs of magnesium, incandescent suns.
Water transmits pressure much more strongly than air. If an intense
pressure wave hits a boat it rips it apart at the seams. To destroy a
submerged U-boat, depth charges don't have to hit it; they need only
explode within the so-called lethal radius. The small depth charges 
dropped by airplanes weigh about 150 pounds, the destroyer bombs about
500 pounds. At a depth of 350 feet, the lethal radius extends about 275
to 350 feet. Once you've learned something, it sticks. I feel a kind of
satisfaction that I now know this kind of thing by heart.
For a while all is quiet. I strain my ears. No propeller noise, no
splashing of bombs. Only the thin humming of our electric motors. Not
even the sound of breathing. The Commander suddenly seems to remember
that we're here. He doesn't move, but he glances around and whispers, "I
could see them clearly. They were standing on the bridge, gaping straight
at us. There were three men in the crow's nest. A corvette!"
He bends forward and whispers through the circular door to the
sound man, "See if they're going away." Still bending forward a minute
later, his question becomes more urgent: "Louder or weaker?"
The operator answers immediately. "No change." It's Herrmann: face
like a Noh-mask--colorless, eyes and mouth thin lines. The Old Man orders
us down farther.
Our pressure hull can withstand a good deal. But the flanges, all
those damned pierced sections, are our Achilles' heel. And there are too
many of them.
The most dangerous bombs for the boat are those that explode
diagonally under the keel, because the underside has the largest number
of flanges and outboard plugs. The deeper you go, the smaller the lethal
radius: the water pressure, which is itself a threat at such depths
because of the overloading on the seams, also limits the effective radius
of the bombs--at 130, it's perhaps i6o feet.
Suddenly a handful of pebbles rattles against the boat.
"Asdic!" I hear a voice from the stern end of the control room. The
jagged word suddenly stands out in my head in glaring capitals.
A shudder runs down my spine: _Anti-Submarine Development
Investigation Committee_; the supersonic detection system!
It's the impact of the directional beam against our side that
produces this low tinkling, chirping sound. In the absolute silence it
has all the force of a siren. Time between impulses: about thirty
seconds.
"Turn it off!" I want to shout. The chirping grates on my nerves.
No one dares so much as lift his head or speak, even though it will find
us even if we remain as silent as the grave. Against it, silence is
useless. So is stopping the E-motors. Normal hydrophones are outclassed
by the E-motors, but the Asdic isn't dependent on sound, it reacts to our
mass. Depth no longer affords any protection.
The nervous tension is infectious. My hands are shaking. I'm glad I
don't have to stand up; instead I'm able to sit in the frame of the
circular doorway. I try out actions that require no major bodily
movement: swallowing, blinking, grinding my teeth, making faces-- a
crease to the right, a crease to the left, forcing saliva between my
teeth.
The operator whispers, "Getting louder!"
The Commander frees himself from the periscope shaft, makes his way
past me almost on tiptoe. "Any change in direction?"
"Bearing still two hundred ninety-five degrees."
Four detonations in quick succession. The roaring, gurgling surge
of the explosions has barely subsided when the Commander says in a low
voice, "She was well camouflaged, a fairly old ship, rather squat."
A hard blow against my feet jolts me badly. The floor plates
rattle.
"Twenty-seven--twenty-eight!" the navigator counts, trying to
imitate the Old Man's elaborate casualness.
A pail goes rattling partway across the floor plates.
"Hell and damnation--quiet!"
Now it sounds as if the pebbles are in a tin can, being shaken this
way and that; in between is a louder, singing sound, with an underlying
quick, sharp chirping, like crickets--the whirling propeller blades of
the corvette. I stand rigid, frozen. I don't dare make the slightest
movement; it's as if any motion, even the smallest slithering sound,
would bring the beating propellers closer. Not a flicker of an eyelash, a
twitch of the eye, not a breath, not a quiver of a nerve, not a ripple of
the muscles, not even a goose pimple.
Another five bombs! The navigator adds them to the total. My
expression doesn't change. The Commander raises his head. Clearly
emphasizing each word, he speaks into the echo of the crashing water.
"Keep calm--calm, gentlemen. This is nothing at all."
His quiet voice does us good, eases our jangled nerves.
Now we are struck by a single ringing blow, like a giant cudgel on
a sheet of steel. Two or three men begin to stagger.
The air is hazy, hanging in blue layers. And again the heavy
explosions.
"Thirty-four--thirty-five--thirty-six!" This time the counting
comes in a whisper.
The Commander remains firm. "What in the world--is bothering you?"
He withdraws into himself once more, calculating courses. It's deathly
still in the boat. After a while the whispering voice comes again.
"What's his bearing now?"
"Two hundred sixty degrees--getting louder!"
The Commander raises his head. He's reached a decision.
"Hard a-starboard!" And immediately afterward, "Sound room-- we're
turning to starboard!"
A wrench has to be passed through to the stern. I reach for it
eagerly and hand it on. Dear god, to be able to _do_ something--turn
handwheels, adjust levers, man the pumps. . .
The operator leans out into the passageway again. His eyes are open
but he's staring into infinity. He sounds like a medium speaking. "Sounds
growing louder--two hundred thirty--two hundred twenty."
"Nonessential lights out," the Old Man orders. "Who the hell knows
how long we may need the current!"
The operator reports again, "Attacking again--sounds bearing two
hundred ten degrees--getting louder fast! Quite close!" The excitement
has upset his delivery.
The Commander orders: "Both engines full ahead!"
The seconds stretch out. Nothing. No one moves.
"Let's hope they don't get their friends in on it!" The Old Man
voices a fear that's been in my bones for a long time: the sweepers, the
killers . . . a pack of dogs is death to the hare.
Whoever has us on the hook now is no beginner, and we're
defenseless in spite of the five torpedoes in our tubes. We can't
surface, we can't come speeding from behind cover and throw ourselves on
the enemy. We haven't even the grim assurance to be had from simply
holding a weapon in your hand. We can't so much as shout at them. Just 
creep away. Keep going deeper. How deep are we now? I can't believe my
eyes: the pointer of the manometer stands at 465. "Shipyard guarantee
three hundred" flashes through my mind.
Ten minutes pass and nothing happens.
Another handful of pebbles hits the boat high up on the port
buoyancy tank. I can see from the operator's face that more depth charges
are coming. He's moving his lips, counting the seconds before detonation.
The first is so well aimed that I feel the shock all the way up my
spine. We're in a huge drum with a steel plate for a drum head. I see the
navigator's lips moving but I hear nothing. Have I gone deaf?
But now I can hear the Commander. He's ordering higher speed again.
He raises his voice to be heard over the pandemonium. "All right! Carry
on just as you are, gentlemen, pay no attention to this nonsense! At home
there are . . ."
He breaks off in mid-sentence. Suddenly there's a humming
stillness. Only the occasional swish and slap from the bilge.
"Bow up! Steady!" the Chief orders the hydroplane men. His whisper
sounds too loud in the silence. Once again the E-motors have been reduced
to crawling speed. Bilge water gurgles toward the stern. Just where does
it all come from? Wasn't it properly bailed in advance?
"Thirty-eight . . . forty-one!" the navigator counts.
With the roaring and bursting of the bombs still in my ears the
silence that follows seems like a bizarre acoustical black hole,
bottomless. Probably just to keep the silence from becoming too painful,
the Commander whispers, "I'm not sure whether those characters up there
are in contact!" At the same moment new detonations shake the depths: the
answer is plain.
Once more my ears can't distinguish one explosion from the next.
Nor have I any impression of whether the bombs are exploding right or
left, above or below the boat. But the Old Man can obviously locate them.
He's probably the only one who knows our posiHon relative to our
tormentor. Or is the navigator calculating too? In any case I no longer
have the slightest clue. I see only the needle of the depth manometer
moving slowly forward over the dial. We're going deeper again.
The Chief is bending forward toward the hydroplane operators. His
face is thrown into unnatural relief against the dark background, like
that of an actor lit only by the footlights, every bone emphasized by
dark lines or shadow. His hand looks waxen. There's a black streak across
his right cheek. He's narrowed his eyes as if dazzled by the light.
The two hydroplane operators crouch motionless in front of their
control buttons. Even when they change the hydroplane settings one sees
no movement. The slight pressure of a finger requires no shift of their
limbs. Our hydroplanes are power-operated. What more could we possibly
want? Except for some piece of equipment that would allow us to observe
the enemy from way down here.
A breathing space? I try to settle myself more firmly. The corvette
certainly won't keep us waiting long. It's simply circling again; even
when it's moving away from us, the goddam Asdic keeps us cornered. The
people up there have got every man they can spare on the bridge, peering
at the choppy sea, searching the marbled foam for some sign of us.
Nothing--zebra patterns drawn in green; green and white oxgall paper
streaked with black . . . but it's the iridescent sheen of oil they're
really after.
Still no move from the hydrophone operator: no sounds to report.
A strange clicking noise. A new device to locate us? Minutes pass.
No one moves a muscle. The clicking stops; in its place another handful
of pebbles strikes the boat, small gravel stones this time. Abruptly the
Commander raises his head. "D'you think we'll get them--again?"
Get them again? Does he mean the convoy, or the corvette?
He leans forward and speaks softly to the hydrophone man. "Find out
if she's going away." Seconds later he asks impatiently, "Louder or
weaker?"
"Staying the same," replies the operator, and after a while,
"Getting louder."
"Any deviation?"
"Bearing still two hundred twenty degrees."
The Commander immediately has the rudder put hard to starboard. So
we're going to double back again.
And now he orders both motors slow ahead.
Drops of condensation punctuate the tense silence at regular
intervals: _Pit-pat--tick-tack--pitch-patch_.
A hard blow makes the floor plates jump and rattle. "Forty-seven--
forty-eight." And then, "Forty-nine--fifty--fifty-one."
A glance at my wristwatch: 14:30. When was the alarm? Must have
been shortly after twelve. We've been under pursuit for two hours!
My watch has a red second hand on the same pin as the two main
hands, so that it's constantly circling the dial in a series of jerky
movements. I concentrate on this hand, measuring the interval between the
individual detonations: two minutes, thirty seconds--another one; thirty
seconds--the next; then twenty seconds.
I'm happy to have something to do. Nothing else exists. I take a
tighter grip with my right hand as though to focus my concentration. It
has to come to an end. _Has to_.
Another hard, sharp blow: forty-four seconds this time. Up to this
point I've been mouthing syllables noiselessly, but now I can clearly
feel my lips spread into a flattened oval, baring my teeth. Now I need my
left hand to hang on with too.
The Commander orders us down another seventy feet.
Almost seven hundred now. A loud crackling and snapping runs
through the boat. The new control-room assistant glances at me in fear.
"Only the woodwork," whispers the Commander.
It's the wooden paneling that creaks and snaps so loudly. The
interior structure can't stand the compression. Seven hundred feet. Every
square inch of steel skin now has to withstand a weight of 284 pounds,
which means over twenty tons per square foot. All this on a hull less
than an inch thick.
The crackling's getting sharper.
"Unpleasant," murmurs the Chief.
The excruciating tension exerted on the steel skin is torture to
me: I feel as if my own skin were being stretched. Another crack
resounds, as loud as a rifle shot, and my scalp twitches. Under this
insane pressure our hull is as fragile as an eggshell.
The ship's fly appears less than two feet away. I wonder how she
likes this infernal drum solo. Each of us chooses his own fate: it's as
true for the fly as it is for me. We both embarked on this undertaking of
our own free will.
A double blow, then a third, not much weaker than its predecessors.
The people up there are fishing for us with an even tighter net.
Renewed clattering of floor plates and deafening after-roar.
Peace lasts only a couple of heartbeats. Then two shattering blows
and the glass plates of the depth manometers fall tinkling to the floor.
The light goes out.
The cone of a pocket flashlight wavers across the walls and comes
to rest on the dial of the depth manometer. I make a terrifying
discovery: the hands of both manometers are gone. The water gauge between
the two hydroplane operators has cracked and is shooting a hissing stream
of water straight across the room.
"Leak through the water gauge," I hear a shaky voice report.
The Commander snarls, "Nonsense, cut the dramatics!"
The empty dials stare like the eyes of a corpse. We can no longer
tell whether the boat is sinking or rising.
My scalp crawls again. If the instruments have failed us, we have
no way of telling our position.
I stare intently at the black ends of the shafts, but without a
pointer they are meaningless.
The control-room mate fumbles about among the pipelines by
flashlight. Apparently trying to reach some valve that will close off the
spurting stream of water. He's soaked to the skin before he finds it.
Although the flow is choked off, he continues to feel about on the floor.
Suddenly he's holding a pointer. Cautiously he lifts his precious find
and places it on the square shaft of the small manometer, the one that
registers the lowest depths.
It feels as if all our lives depend on whether the thin strip of
metal will move or not.
The man takes his hand away. The needle quivers and slowly begins
to turn. Silently the Commander nods approbation.
The manometer shows six hundred feet.
The hydrophone man reports, "Sounds getting louder--two hundred
thirty degrees_two hundred twenty degrees!"
The Commander takes his cap off and lays it on the chart chest. His
hair is matted with sweat. He takes a deep breath and says, "Keep it up!"
For once his voice isn't entirely under control. There is an
unmistakable undertone of resignation in it.
"Noises bearing two hundred ten degrees! Growing louder-- attack
beginning again!"
The Commander immediately orders full speed ahead. A sharp jolt
runs through the boat as it leaps forward. The Commander leans against
the shining oily column of the sky periscope, resting the back of his
head on it.
Long-forgotten images rise in my mind: two cardboard disks painted
in spirals and spinning in opposite directions on the ice cream machines
at country fairs. The tangle of red and white completely fills my head
and becomes the trail of two depth charges, flaring comets that consume
everything in a blaze of white.
The hydrophone operator startles me. Another report. I stare at his
mouth, but his words don't penetrate.
More waiting, more holding my breath. Even the smallest sound is
painful, a touch on a raw wound. As if my nerves had escaped the outer
layer of skin and were now exposed. I have only one thought: they're up
there. Right overhead. I forget to breathe. I'm stifling before I slowly,
cautiously, fill my lungs with oxygen. Against closed eyelids I see bombs
tumbling perpendicularly into the depths trailing sparkling air bubbles, 
exploding into fire. Around their incandescent cores all the colors of
the spectrum flare up in mad combinations, leaping and dying again but
growing steadily more intense until the whole interior of the sea glows
like a blast furnace.
The control-room mate breaks the spell. Gesturing and whispering,
he calls the Chief's attention to a corner of the control room where a
can of lubricating oil is overflowing. This is about the most trivial
problem imaginable right now, but it upsets him.
The Chief nods permission for him to do something about it. The
pipe that is dripping oil reaches straight into the can. He can't simply
take the can away from under it, but has to tilt it to get it out. As a
result, more oil spills onto the floor plates and forms an ugly black
puddle.
The navigator shakes his head in disgust. The control-room mate
withdraws the overfilled can as cautiously as a thief trying to avoid
setting off a burglar alarm.
"Corvette noises receding astern!" reports the operator. Almost
simultaneously, two more bombs explode. But the roar of the detonations
is weaker and duller than before.
"Way off," says the Commander.
_Rwumm--tjummwumm!_
Even fainter. The Commander seizes his cap. "Practice maneuvers!
That's the sort of thing they ought to work on at home!"
The control-room mate is already busy fitting new glass tubes into
the broken water gauges; he seems to know that the mere sight of the
breakage effects us like poison.
When I stand up, I'm stiff all over. No feeling in my legs. I try
to put one foot in front of the other--feels like stepping into the void.
I hold fast to the table and look at the chart.
There is the pencil line showing the boat's course, and the pencil
cross indicating its last position. And here the line suddenly stops--
I'm going to make a note of the latitude and longitude of the place if we
get out of this.
The operator sweeps the whole circumference of his dial.
"Well?" asks the Commander. He acts bored, pushing his tongue into
his left cheek till it bulges.
"Going away!" the operator replies.
The Commander looks around. Satisfaction personified. He even
grins. "As far as I can see, gentlemen, the incident is over."
He staggers a little. "Very instructive, of course. First, all that
damn chasing around and then a real bomb scare!" He climbs through the
circular door and into his cubbyhole.
"Bring me a piece of paper!" Is he going to compose something
really profound for the war log or a report for the High Command? No,
it's sure to be nothing more than, "Surprised by corvette in rain squall.
Three hours of depth bomb pursuit." I wouldn't bet on anything more
colorful than that.
Five minutes later he's back in the control room. He exchanges a
glance with the Chief, then orders, "Take her to periscope depth!" And
climbs deliberately to the tower.
The Chief has the hydroplanes adjusted.
"Report depth!" The Commander's voice comes down.
"One hundred twenty-five feet." Then in sequence: "Sixty feet.
Forty-five feet--periscope above surface!"
I hear the periscope motor hum, stop, hum again. Minutes pass. Not
a word. We wait. Not a sound from the Old Man.
We look at each other questioningly. "Something wrong?" the
control-room mate murmurs.
Finally the Commander breaks the silence. "Crash dive! Deep! All
hands forward!"
I repeat the order. The hvdrophone operator passes it on. From
astern I hear it in multiple echoes. Tense with anxiety the crew rushes
through the control room toward the bow.
"Goddam filthy weather!" the Chief curses under his breath. The
hand of the manometer moves forward again: sixty, one hundred, one
hundred fifty feet. . .
The Commander's seaboots appear. He clambers slowly down into the
control room. All eyes are fixed on his face. But he merely smiles
sardonically and orders, "Both motors slow ahead. Course sixty degrees."
Finally he enlightens us.
"The corvette's lying six hundred yards away. Stopped, as far as I
could see. Wanted to surprise us, the bastards." The Old Man bends over
the chart. After a while he turns to me. "Fucking maniacs. You can't be
too careful. Well, let's crawl our way comfortably westward for the time
being."
Then, to the navigator, "When does twilight begin?"
"At 18.30 hours, Herr Kaleun."
"Good. We'll stay down for the time being."
There no longer seems to be any immediate danger: at least the
Commander was speaking loudly enough. He inhales with a deep snort,
arches his chest, holds his breath, and nods from one of us to the other.
"After the battle," he says with a meaningful look at the confusion
of broken glass, strewn oilskins, and upturned buckets.
I see drawings by Dix: horses lying on their backs, bellies torn
open like exploded ships, all four legs stretched rigidly toward the sky,
soldiers sunk in trench slime, teeth bared in final madness. Here on
board, however, we may have just narrowly escaped destruction, but there
are no sprawling tangles of entrails, no charred limbs, no lacerated
flesh bleeding through canvas covers. A few fragments of broken glass,
damaged manometers, spilled cans of condensed milk, two crushed pictures
in the gangway--these are the only traces of battle. The steward appears,
casts a disgusted look at the debris, and begins to clean up. The photo
of the C-in-C U-boats, alas, has not been touched.
But there's been a lot of damage in the engine and motor rooms. The
Chief recites a long list of technical details. The Old Man nods
patiently.
"Just let her plow along steadily. I have a feeling we're still
going to be needed around here." And then to me, "Time to eat. I'm
starving!" He takes his cap off and hangs it on top of the oilskins on
the wall.
"The fried eggs have probably gone cold," the Second Watch Officer
remarks and grins.
"Hey, Cookie, fry up some more eggs," the Commander shouts toward
the stern.
I'm in a daze. Are we really still here or is it an illusion?
There's a ringing in my inner ear, as if someone's playing back a
recording of the bombs going off. I can't really grasp the fact that 
we've come through the storm in safety. I sit there silent and shake my
head to try to banish the sights and sounds that haunt me.
Still less than an hour since the last depth charges fell, and the
radioman is putting a record on the phonograph. Marlene Dietrich's voice
is soothing. "Put your money away--some other time you can pay. . ." It's
a record from the Old Man's private collection.
At 19.00 the Commander gives the order over the loudspeaker to
surface. The Chief swings himself through the circular door and gives the
necessary instructions to the hydroplane operators. The bridge watch
climbs into their rubber clothes, stands ready under the tower hatch, and
fumbles with their binoculars.
"Two hundred feet--one fifty--boat rising rapidly!" reports the
Chief. When the manometer hand reaches a hundred the Commander orders a
hydrophone check in every direction. No one makes a sound. I hardly dare
breathe. Nothing.
The Commander climbs the ladder. When the boat is at periscope
depth I can tell from the sound of the gears that he's doing a complete
sweep.
We wait intently: nothing!
"Surface!" Compressed air rushes hissing into the diving cell. The
Commander retracts the periscope. It takes a while for it to settle into
place with a click. Only then does he remove his face from the rubber
eyepieces.
"Tower clear," the Chief reports upward and then, "Equalize
pressure!"
The First Watch Officer turns the hatch spindle, and the hatch
springs back with a snap like a champagne cork. Pressure equalization
can't have been complete. Fresh air pours into the boat. Cold and damp. I
gulp it in eagerly. It's a gift--and I savor it to the full, pumping it
into my lungs, tasting it on my tongue. The boat pitches and tosses.
"Prepare to blow tanks! Clear for ventilation! Diesel room stand
ready to dive!"
The Chief nods his approval. The Commander's on his guard, doesn't
want to run any risks.
The circle of the hatch still frames the dark sky. A few scattered
stars. Sparkling and twinkling, tiny lanterns wavering in the wind.
"Stand by port diesel!"
"Port diesel ready!"
The boat drifts, rocking. The hatch wanders back and forth beneath
the shining stars.
"Port diesel slow ahead!"
A trembling shudder runs through the boat. The diesel fires.
The Commander orders the bridge watch and the navigator to the
bridge.
"Radiogram to be sent!" I hear someone say.
The navigator is already on his way down. I peer over his shoulder
and can't repress a grin: the text he's writing out is almost exactly
what I had predicted.
He can't understand why I'm smiling, and looks offended.
"Lapidary," I say. But he doesn't understand that either. He makes
his way to the radio shack and I see him shaking his head.
"Permission to come on the bridge?"
"_Jawohl!_" and I climb up.
The cloud curtain is parting to reveal the moon; where its beams
strike the water, the sea glitters and glistens. The cloud curtain
closes, and now the only brightness comes from a few scattered stars and
from the water. Behind the boat the foam phosphoresces--luminous green
magic. Waves hiss over the bow like water poured onto hot iron plates,
but beneath the sharp hissing is a continuing dull roar. Occasionally a
larger wave rises and strikes the boat's side with the heavy, hollow boom
of a gong. _Bomm--bomm--tsch--jwumm!_
Rather than being buoyed up by water, the boat seems to be gliding
along between the depths and the heights on a thin, scarred skin--abyss
above, abyss below: a thousand stories of darkness in either direction.
Wandering thoughts--confused, hardly focused: We are saved. Voyagers to
Orcus who have found our way home.
"All the same, it's a good thing this pond is three dimensional!"
the Commander says close beside me.
I'm at the table. Breakfast. Fragments of conversation from the
Quarters. Going by the voice, it must be Johann. He seems to be in the
middle of a story:
". . . turned out the only thing there was a stove. God oh god, was
that a runaround! Nothing to be had. Not even with U-boat insignia on my
jacket. The kitchen cabinet was no problem, thank god. My brother-inlaw's a prison inspector. He's having it made in the prison . . . Of
course there's no baby carriages to be had either! Right away I said to
Gertrude, 'Do you really have to have a carriage like that these days?
Black women carry their babies around in shawls!' We still need a
standing lamp to make our little sitting room complete. But the old man
can go ahead and pay for that . . . Gertrude's already as big as a house.
Six months! I'd like to know whether we'll be moved in when the time
comes . . . Nah-- no rugs--who needs rugs? Besides, how'd you get one
except by heisting it? My other brother-in-law can take care of that,
he's a painter. Likes to call himself an interior decorator. As I always
say, 'If only the house is still standing!' They've had eight raids in
one week!"
"Well, one more patrol and then off to the training course,"
someone says in a comforting tone. The bosun.
"We can paint the table white and make a little box around the gas
meter."
"The men at the dock could make that for you. You could take a
little box like that away without any trouble. After all, it's not the
biggest thing in the world." That must be the navigator.
"If I were you I'd have them make the baby carriage at the same
time--after all, they're equipped for that sort of thing," the bosun
teases him.
"Thanks for the tip. If I need a bulletproof one, I'll remember
it."
He's managed to have the last word, but he doesn't stop there. "All
that fuss about hoarding provisions. Why not give everyone a couple of
cans? Gertrude could make good use of them."
Next morning around nine o'clock we come on an expanse of wreckage.
One of our boats must have scored a hit on a convoy. Our bow wave parts
planks smeared black with oil. A rubber dinghy bobs up. There's a man in
it. He looks as if he's sitting in a rocking chair, his feet dangling
over the bulge of the side, almost touching the water. His forearms are
raised as if trying to read a newspaper. I'm surprised how short they
are. Then we draw nearer and I realize that both his hands are gone. The
blackened stumps are stretched toward us. His face is a burned-out mask
with two gleaming rows of teeth. For a moment, the illusion of a black
stocking pulled over his head.
"Dead!" says the navigator. He could have saved his breath.
The dinghy and its corpse slide rapidly past, rocking violently in
our stern wave. The "reader" seems to enjoy being cradled in this
comfortable position.
No one ventures a word. Finally the navigator says, "But he was a
_civilian_ sailor. I just can't work out where he got the dinghy. They
usually have rafts on freighters. The dinghy--that's very funny. Looked
exactly like the Navy."
A technical observation at this juncture does us good. The Old Man
is glad to pursue the subject. The two of them spend quite a while
discussing whether or not steamers have been carrying naval personnel for
some time. "Otherwise who would man the guns?"
There's no end to the flotsam. The sunken steamer has laid a broad
swatch of wreckage in the water: black fuel oil, crates, splintered
lifeboats, charred remains of rafts, life preservers, complete
superstructures. In between, three or four drowned men hanging from their
life jackets with their heads under water. And there are more: a whole
field of floating corpses, most of them without life jackets, faces
submerged, many mutilated.
The navigator took too long to spot the dead men among the
wreckage. There's no time for us to alter our course.
The Old Man's voice goes cold and he orders higher speed. We shear
through the scattered, torn remnants, bow throwing everything aside like
a snowplow. The Old Man stares straight ahead. The navigator surveys his
sector.
I see the starboard lookout swallow as a corpse slips past, draped
head down over a white-striped timber.
Wonder how he got it.
"There's a life preserver!" says the Old Man, and his voice grates,
suddenly rusty.
In quick succession he gives two or three orders for engines and
rudder, and our boat swings slowly toward the red and white life
preserver, which is only momentarily visible among the waves.
The Commander turns to the navigator and says, much too loudly,
"I'll take it on the port side. Move--Number One!"
I keep my eyes fixed on the dancing life preserver. It quickly
looms larger.
The bosun reports breathlessly on the bridge, then climbs down the
iron steps on the tower. He's carrying a small grappling hook.
Although we've known all along what the Old Man has in mind, he
says, "Just want to see what the scow was called."
The navigator's up as high as he can go, hanging far out so as to
be able to keep the entire boat in view for maneuvering. "Port engine
slow ahead! Starboard engine full speed ahead! Rudder hard aport!"
The helmsman in the tower acknowledges the orders. The life
preserver disappears from time to time in the troughs of the waves. We
have to keep a sharp lookout so as not to lose track of it.
The navigator has the port engine stopped and the starboard run
slow speed ahead. Once again I'm aware that all the boat's otherwise
famous maneuverability doesn't amount to much in a high sea. Given its
length, it's so narrow that the propellers are far too close together.
Now where's the life preserver? What's become of the damned thing?
It ought to be almost dead on our port beam . . . thank god, there it is.
"Port fifteen points, steer one hundred degrees--both engines slow
ahead!"
Slowly the boat homes in on the life preserver. The navigator
brings the helm around and sets a direct course. Seems to be working
right.
The bosun holds the grappling iron in one hand and the line coiled
like a lasso in the other. Advancing cautiously, hanging onto the net
guard for support, he moves over the slippery gratings toward the bow.
The life preserver is already level with us. Damn: the letters seem to be
on the other side. Or have they been washed off?
Slowly it comes within ten feet of the boat. Could hardly be
better. The bosun takes aim and throws his iron. To one side! I groan
aloud, as if I'd been the one to be hit. Before he's reeled the iron in
again, the life preserver has already drifted far astern.
"Both engines stop!"
Damnation, what now? The boat still has a lot of headway. We can't
just put on the brakes!
The bosun has run to the stern and now he makes a cast from the
afterdeck, but this time he jerks on the line too soon. The iron splashes
into the water two feet this side of the life preserver, and he looks up
despairingly.
"Another approach, if you please," the Commander says frostily. The
boat describes a great circle, while I concentrate on keeping the life
preserver in range of my glasses.
This time the navigator goes so close that the bosun could have
caught the thing with his hand if he'd stretched himself out on the upper
deck. But he still relies on the grappling iron and this time makes a
hit.
"_Gulf Stream!_" he shouts to the bridge.
In the Officers' Mess the Old Man says, "I hope our activities
don't make difficulties for anyone."
The Chief looks up questioningly. So does the First Watch Officer.
But the Old Man takes his time. Finally he reveals haltingly what's going
through his head. "Assuming our colleagues didn't find out the name of
the ship they sank and then greatly overestimated it in their success
report--and assuming they've reported a fifteen thousand tonner--now we
report that we've found the wreckage of the steamer _Gulf Stream_--and it
turns out that she's in the register at only ten thousand tons--"
The Commander pauses to see whether we're all with him and says,
"Could be embarrassing, really embarrassing, don't you think?"
I examine the linoleum tabletop and silently wonder what we're
gabbing about. Whether a commander can make a fool of himself or not?
First a grisly paper chase and now these guessing games.
The Commander has leaned back. I look up to see him stroking his
beard with the back of his right hand. At the same time there's a nervous
twitch in his face. Of course--it's an act: he's playing hard-nosed to
inoculate us with his own firmness. He feels it all very keenly. He
overacts, entertains his audience with observations and conjectures--just
to keep us free from haunting scenes of nightmare and horror.
But the dead seaman won't leave me alone. He blots out my visions
of the devastation around him. He was the first dead foreign seaman I had
seen. From a distance he looked as though he'd made himself comfortable
and would go on happily paddling away, his head tilted slightly backward,
the better to see the sky. The burnedoff hands--other people must have
lifted him into the dinghy. He couldn't have managed it without hands. A
total mystery.
No survivors to be seen. They must have been picked up by a
sweeper. In a convoy people who lose their ship still have a chance. But
the others? Those on lone vessels?
The Commander is at the chart table again, calculating. Before long
he orders both engines full speed ahead.
He gets to his feet, straightens up and squares his shoulders,
shakes himself thoroughly, clears his throat for a good minute, and tests
his voice before uttering a single word. "If we're not square on the
course of the convoy I'll eat my hat. Probably missed a whole batch of
radio reports while we were submerged, dammit. Let's hope the contact
boat calls in again--or anyone else who has the scent now."
And then suddenly, "A depth charge is the most inaccurate weapon
there is!,,
The Chief stares at him. The Old Man nods with a trace of selfsatisfaction. Everyone in the control room has heard. He's just got
around to drawing the moral of the corvette attack: You don't score hits
with depth charges. After all, we're the proof--the living proof--of
that.
Bertold is repeatedly requested to report his position. We wait
just as intently as the people in Kernével for his answer.
"Hm," says the Old Man and gnaws at a few hairs in his beard. Then
again, "Hm."
VI STORM
_Friday. Forty-second Day at Sea_. The nor'wester is blowing
harder. The navigator has an explanation. "Apparently we're south of a
family of cyclones that's being drawn toward Europe by way of Greenland."
"Funny customs these Cyclops and their families have," I say.
"What do you mean--Cyclops?"
"The Cyclops is a one-eyed wind."
The navigator favors me with an openly suspicious glance. It's
probably high time for me to stick my head out into the fresh air again.
The sea is now a dark blue-green. I try to define its shade.
Arborvitae? No, rather bluer than arborvitae. Onyx? Yes, onyx is closer.
In the distance the sea appears almost black under a mass of lowhanging cloud. Scattered about the horizon a few single clouds, dark
gray-blue and bloated. Halfway to the zenith and directly ahead of us
hangs another that looks more solid. On either side, arranged in orderly
rows, dirty wisps of gray--like large weaver's shuttles. And--directly
above--wind-torn cirrus hardly distinguishable from their background;
really not clouds at all but just carelessly slapped-on whitewash.
The only violent movement in the sky is in the east, where new
clouds well up over the rim of the sea, growing visibly plumper until
they finally free themselves from the horizon like balloons with
sufficient gas to float up. I watch them take over the sky. From the
dark, massed army close to the horizon in the west the first scouts set
out, little groups of clouds that gradually feel their way forward to the
zenith. Only when they have established an outpost does the whole black
horde move up. It rises, slowly pushed sideways by the wind, but already
there are new clouds underneath, thrusting their ragged edges above the
horizon--forced upward out of some apparently inexhaustible reservoir.
Rank upon rank of them.
Seaman Bockstiegel, nineteen, comes to Herrmann, who doubles as the
medical orderly, with an itching inflammation of the armpits.
"Crabs! Down with your pants!" says Herrmann.
Then suddenly he explodes. "Are you completely nuts? There's a
whole lousy army running around here. They'll finish off a mouthful like
you in no time!"
The orderly reports to the First Watch Officer, who orders an
inspection at 19.00 for those off-duty, and for the current watch an hour
and a half later.
The Commander, who was asleep, finds out about it an hour later in
the Officers' Mess. He's like a bull stopped in his tracks by the cape as
he glowers up at the First Watch Officer. Then he strikes his forehead
with the flat of his left hand, fighting to control his anger.
Word gets around in the bow compartment. "Knocks you sideways,
doesn't it?"--"Nasty business."--"This on top of everything else."--"What
a nerve!"
Now we seem to have ship's crablice as well as a ship's fly. We'll
soon be a kind of Noah's ark for the lower orders of animal.
Five men on the off-duty watch are found to have crabs. Soon the
sweetish smell of petroleum spreads through the boat. Extermination is in
progress.
The wind comes roaring at us like compressed air through a narrow
nozzle. Sometimes it ceases for a moment while the bellows are
replenished, then suddenly it lets loose again with increased fury.
With each moment that passes the water surges to fiercer heights in
the grip of the gusts. Streaks of foam flicker out in every direction
like cracks appearing in dark glass. The waves look more and more
sinister--a seething, swirling cauldron. Again and again the spray sweeps
hissing over our bows and spurts up through the gratings. The wind sweeps 
through the showers, to send whiplash after whiplash of water smacking
against the faces of the forward lookouts.
Humidity in the control room gets worse. Bit by bit, everything is
coated with a film of damp. The ladder is wet and cold to the touch.
Without oilskins and sou'wester I can no longer remain on the
bridge. Once below, the first thing I look at is the barograph. Its
needle has described a descending staircase. It looks like the
crosssection of a cascade. The bad-weather line is falling so steadily
that it'll soon reach the bottom of the paper.
The barograph is a fascinating instrument. The weather seems to
take up ,a pen and write its autobiography on a drum that slowly revolves
on its vertical axis. This line, however, is broken at regular intervals
by sharply rising peaks.
Since I can make no sense out of these spikes I ask the navigator
what they mean.
"They're the record of our daily practice dives--the barograph
reacts not only to variations in the pressure outside but also--
naturally enough--to variations inside the boat. The spikes mean excess
pressure."
The weather is obviously worrying the Commander. "Lows of this sort
sometimes move at one to two hundred miles an hour, which means severe
disturbances and oscillations between subtropical and polar air," he
explains. "They create violent turbulence--the wind can go completely
crazy."
"You're in for a treat," the Chief says tauntingly, grinning at me.
The Old Man bends over the chart, the navigator peering over his
shoulder.
"These North Atlantic storm fronts are no joke. There'll be cold
air behind the retreating low. It'll probably bring squalls and, with any
luck, better visibility. Of course we could go farther north, but then
we'd get deeper into the eye of the squall. And dodging south is
unfortunately out on tactical grounds. Well, Kriechbaum; only one thing
to do--praise the Lord and go slap through the middle. Too bad we've got
the sea dead on our port beam."
"It's going to be a real rodeo," says the navigator hollowly.
A few of the off-duty seamen are busy using light lines to lash
down the provision chests. Otherwise there isn't much to do: none of the
storm preparations you get on a surface vessel. The Old Man can be
comfortable, his big hands resting idly on his thighs.
At lunch we have to put up the plate rails; even so, we spend our
time trying to keep the soup from slopping over.
All at once the Chief says casually to the Second Engineer, "What's
with your eyelashes and eyebrows? You ought to show that to the doc."
After the two Watch Officers and the Second Engineer have departed,
he says--just as casually--"Crablice."
"What--how's that again?" snaps the Old Man.
"What the Second Engineer's got in his eyebrows and the roots of
his eyelashes."
"You're joking."
"Seriously. When they start breeding _there_, things have gone
pretty far."
The Old Man inhales violently through his nose and stares at the
Chief--disconcerted, forehead a washboard of wrinkles, mouth half open.
"With all due respect to the range of your knowledge, is that
supposed to mean your successor is. . . ?"
"Tsch--perhaps one oughtn't to assume the worst straight off!"
There is a cynical grin on the Chief's face. The Commander shakes
his head as if to test his vertebrae. Finally he says, "The Second
Engineer has just gone up in my estimation. I'm curious to see what he'll
do next."
Now it's the Chief's turn to gape in astonishment.
The boat gradually goes quiet. You can hear the humming of the
ventilators. Only when the door to the bow compartment opens for a few
instants do we hear snatches of song and the gabble of voices. I get up
and make my way forward.
"Great ruckus in the cable locker," says the navigator with an
approving nod as I pass through the Quarters. The bow compartment is even
murkier than usual.
"What's going on here?"
"Jubilation and riot!" a chorus of voices shouts back at me. The
men off-watch are squatting close together tailor-fashion on the floor
plates. It looks like an impromptu version of the robber scene from
_Carmen_, with amazingly tattered costumes improvised out of oil-smeared
drill jackets and streaked sweaters that they've dug out of some rummage
heap.
The boat suddenly heels sharply. Leather jackets and oilskins swing
out from the wall. We have to hold fast to the bunk ropes. Sharp curses
from the depths of the compartment. I peer into the darkness between the
heads and the hammocks. Someone is dancing about naked.
"The bridge johnny! He's keeping his precious body fit," is the
explanation I get from Little Benjamin. "Does it all the time. He's mad
about himself."
Mournful singing comes from the forward bunks and one of the
hammocks. Little Benjamin gets his harmonica out, ceremoniously empties
it by tapping it in his palm, slides it back and forth a couple of times
across his tightened lips, holding it in the hollow of his hand, and
finally strikes up a melody to which he adds a light tremolo, with soft,
quick taps of his free hand. Hagen hums in tune. One after another the
seamen join in. Bockstiegel leads the chorus.
She took the train to Hamburg
Her mood was black as black.
At Flensburg Junction out she got
And lay upon the track.
The engineer, he spied the girl
And took the brake in hand.
Alas, the train sped blithely on.
A head rolls in the sand.
"Hell and damnation, it's ten to, already!" Fackler announces
suddenly. "What a life. You no sooner sit down than you have to get up
again. Shit!" Cursing, he leaves the group.
Schwalle gets up too, methodically tightening his belt, and
disappears through the door, saying, "Off to work!"
"Give it my love!" Bockstiegel shouts after him.
The Chief is still sitting in the Officers' Mess. He looks at me
expectantly and asks, "What does the glazier do when he's got no glass?"
My look of bewilderment does me no good. No mercy to be had.
"He drinks out of the bottle."
Wearily I ignore the joke.
From the control room the sound of water gushing through the hatch
is like a cloudburst. Occasionally a gigantic fist rises and strikes the
hull. The rumble is so loud it makes me jump. The Commander grins. "Just
the sea elephants trying to rub their spawn off on the boat!"
More dull rumbling. The Chief gets up, braces himself carefully,
lifts one of the floor plates, and motions me toward him. "There goes one
of them now!"
I stick my head through the hole and in the light of a flashlight
see a small car suspended from two rails. There's a man lying on it all
twisted up.
"He's testing the acid concentration in the batteries."
"Nice job in this kind of sea!"
"You can say that again."
I reach for a book but soon discover that I'm much too weary and
bruised to concentrate. The only thing now would be to tie one on--go on
a real bender--put myself an entire world away from this wretched sense
of suffocation and living death. Beck's beer--Pilsner Urquell, good
Münchner Lowenbrau--Martell--Hennessy, the fine three-star stuff!
Suddenly I notice that the Chief is looking intently at me. He
jeers. "Abstracted--that's the word. Our abstracted ship's poet!"
At this I whirl around, bare my teeth, and snarl like a wild
animal. This pleases the Chief. He keeps on grinning for quite a while.
_Saturday_. I'm on morning watch with the navigator. The wind has
whipped the groundswell into foaming crests and swift green valleys. High
mat ridges, their sides dull like slabs of slate. Luckily we no longer
have the sea abeam but directly head on. Who knows what circumstance we
have to thank for this overnight change of course.
We might as well be standing still, as the mountains of water beat
down on us in closed ranks, one after the other.
About halfway through the watch a wall appears directly ahead of
us, looking like gray-black plaster. It reaches from the horizon right
into the sky. Gradually it stirs into life. Arms grow out of it and
slowly extend over half the visible heavens, until they extinguish the
last pale radiance of the sun. The air becomes heavier and heavier with
brute pressure. The hiss and roar of the waves sounds all the louder
because there is a sudden lull in the howling of the wind.
And now the storm is upon us. It advances in a sudden assault,
racing toward us out of the wall ahead, ripping away the greenishwhite
skin from the waves as it comes.
The air is a slab of unbroken mouse-gray. Only the occasional dark
fleck betrays the fact that the whole sky is in wild flight.
From time to time, individual waves rise above the rest, but the
storm challenges them instantly with searing blasts, and whips the hightossed water backward.
The piping of the net guard cable grows steadily shriller.
The storm tries out all its possible voices, and at every possible
strength: shrieking, yowling, groaning. Whenever the bow plunges downward
and the net guard goes underwater, the whining ceases momentarily. But as
soon as the bow springs clear of the mottled green whirlpool, it resounds
again. The banner of water hanging from the net guard is ripped and torn
to rags by the wind--in seconds it's gone.
I brace my back against the periscope housing and inch my way
upward to look over the bulwark of the bridge at the whole length of the
foreship. Screaming blasts of wind instantly strike my head. This is no
longer air--no volatile element--but a solid, tangible mass that forces
itself between my jaws whenever I open my mouth.
The storm! I want to roar aloud with delight. I screw up my eyes in
concentration, taking mental snapshots of the action of the waves,
instant home movies of the origin of the world.
The flying spray forces me into the protection of the bulwark. My
eyelids are swollen. My seaboots full of water. Poorly designed: The
water forces its way into them from the top. The gloves are no good
either. They were completely soaked through, so I handed them down some
time ago. The knuckles of my hands are dead white--washerwoman's hands.
We are enveloped in sheets of foam, and I don't dare straighten up
for minutes at a time.
These metal bathtubs, open at the back, into which we duck like
defensive boxers, don't deserve the name bridges. They have nothing in
common with the bridges of ordinary ships, which extend across the whole
superstructure and are properly glassed in, dry and warm: a sure
protection from which one can look down on a stormy sea from a height of
thirty, forty, fifty feet--as one might from the upper story of a house.
Those bridges have rapidly rotating glass disks that retain not a drop of
water.
Our bridge, on the contrary, is nothing more than a big shield, a
sort of breastplate. The wind deflectors that are built in around the
upper edge of the bulwark are intended to protect us by turning the
horizontal force of the wind into an upward current, thus forming a kind
of wall of air, but a storm of this strength nullifies any effectiveness
they may have. And toward the stern, the bridge offers no protection
whatever; our position is entirely exposed and the water floods in
continuously.
I spend most of the watch standing in swirling water that rises
around me like a tearing, sucking, raging river. Barely has one whirlpool
rushed out astern through the watergates when the Second Watch Officer
shouts, "Hold fast!" and the next surge hurls itself onto the bridge. I
dodge around this boxing ring, chin pressed down against my chest. But
the water has feints of its own. It strikes blows to the face from below,
real driving uppercuts.
So I won't be swept off my feet, I wedge myself between the TBT
post and the wall of the bridge. Brace yourself tight, breathe deep, make
yourself heavy! You can't just rely on the safety belts, however sturdy
and solid they may look.
Still dazed, I have barely raised my head to take a quick glance
round the sector when the Second Watch Officers shouts, "Look out!" and 
another wave roars in. Head down again. Another crack across the back
followed by a second blow from underneath. My hands cramp in a desperate
hold until the knuckles stand out in ridges. I snatch a quick glance
astern: Through the bars of the railing and past the mounting of the
anti-aircraft gun the aftership is invisible--buried under a thick
blanket of seething foam. The gas exhaust flaps have disappeared,
smothered by the whirlpool, as have the air intake valves; the diesels
must now be drawing their air from the inside of the boat.
Within seconds another wave crashes dully against the tower and
shoots high in the air like a breaker meeting a cliff. Two tearing,
blinding walls of spray converge over the aftership, collide, and shoot
roaring upward. Then the water rushes whirling and gurgling over the
aftership and the boat's hull forces its way up again through its
smothering burden of foam to shake off every remaining rivulet of water.
For a few moments the whole upper deck is free. Then the boiling waves
strike again, punching the aftership down. Fight free and dodge away,
duck down and up again, in a neverending sequence.
I can no longer feel a thing as I climb down, soaked. Groaning, I
peel off my rubber jacket. Beside me the bridge johnny is cursing.
"Whoever designed _these_ togs must have been a real asshole."
He continues to gripe as he peels the wet clothes from his body.
"Complain to Headquarters," Isenberg needles him. "The C-inC's
delighted to have suggesions from the fighting forces; you can bet your
life on that."
"Fairly rough," is the Old Man's comment on the sea. He's sitting
at the table leafing through his blue and green notebooks. I want to tell
him that the adjective "rough," for me at least, may serve to describe
sandpaper but not this waterbound insanity--but what's the point? The Old
Man seems to have no stronger word to describe it.
He reads aloud in a grumble. "Unobserved by the enemy, the U-boat
can infiltrate any area of the sea in which it wishes to be of military
service. Thus it is the most suitable mine-layer for use in direct action
against enemy coasts, the mouths of enemy harbors, and estuaries. Here,
at the focus point of enemy commerce, the Uboat's limited load factor is
also less of a disadvantage. Likewise, this limited number of mines
offers optimal chances of success."
He looks up, staring me straight in the face. "Wishes to be of
service--mines offer optimal chances! Well, that's style for you, eh?"
Soon he finds another passage that provokes him to read aloud. "The
U-boat man loves his fighting unit. It proved its daring spirit in the
First World War, and to this day the U-boat Command preserves this same
determination and daring to the best of its ability."
"Pretty, isn't it?"
"I'll say!" says the Old Man and snorts. "The C-in-C's very own
work."
A bit later he shakes his head and reads something aloud from a
newspaper. "Helios surprise tip to win the Cup." He closes his eyes for a
moment, then mutters, "And people think they've got troubles."
How far away it all seems!
I realize that we hardly ever think of the mainland. Rarely does
anyone talk about home. Sometimes I feel we've been on patrol for years. 
If it weren't for the radio news, we could imagine we were voyaging the
globe as the last specimens of _Homo sapiens_ in existence.
I play with the notion that High Command might forget us
altogether. What would happen then? How far could we get, using all our
reserves? Under our feet of course we have the ship that's known to have
the maximum operating range. But what about provisions? Our twilight
world could certainly function as a mushroom farm. The climate here on
board is ideal--the mold on our bread is proof of that. Or watercress.
You're supposed to be able to grow watercress under electric lights. The
bosun could certainly find a place for it, just under the ceiling in the
gangway, for example. Watercress gardens overhead, suspended on gimbals.
Finally, we could catch algae. Algae have a high vitamin C content.
Perhaps there's even a species that would flourish in the bilge, using
the grease as a kind of fertilizer.
_Sunday_. "There ought to be crisp fresh rolls on the table," the
Chief says at breakfast time. "Smothered in salted butter, melting a
little because the rolls are still warm inside--straight from the baker!
And a cup of hot cocoa, not sweet--the bitter kind--but hot. That would
hit the spot."
The Chief raises his eyes ecstatically and dramatically fans the
imaginary fragrance toward his nose.
"You'd make it in burlesque," says the Old Man. "Now show us a
breakfast of powdered scrambled eggs, compliments of the Navy."
On cue, the Chief gags and gulps, making his Adam's apple bob
violently up and down; his eyes are bulging, fixed rigidly on a spot
before him on the table.
The Old Man is satisfied. But the First Watch Officer, whose
expressionless demonstrations of zeal extend even to mealtimes, where he
methodically consumes every last scrap of the rations assigned to him,
finds this more than he can bear. He casts a pained expression around the
table.
"Clear away!" the Commander shouts into the control room, and the
steward appears with his smelly rag. The First Watch Officer turns up his
nose in disgust.
After breakfast I take myself off again to the petty officers'
quarters. I want to catch up on a little sleep. "We're still going to get
knocked around a bit" is the last thing I hear from the Old Man in the
control room.
However hard I try, whatever new position I experiment with, I
cannot wedge my body into the bunk so as not to be rolled and tossed
around. I could get used to the rolling if only it had some rhythm to it.
But the hard jolts when the bow falls or a heavy wave strikes the
foreship drive me to desperation. And there are sinister new sounds.
Roaring blows against the tower that carry an unfamiliar accompaniment, a
ceaseless rasping, whirring, scraping, scratching, and--whole octaves
higher--a threatening, rhythmless drumming, plus a nerve-destroying
series of yowlings, screeches, and whistles. Not a minute passes without
a violent shuddering running the length of the pressure hull or noises
piercing you to the very bone. Against this unending misery, and the orgy
of sound, the only defense is dull resignation.
The hell of it is that the din doesn't stop at night; as the boat
falls quiet, the uproar of the waves seems to increase. At times it
sounds as if waterfalls were plummeting into the molten contents of a
blast furnace. I lie awake and try to differentiate the sounds that make
up the clamor outside: in addition to the rasping and hissing there is
lapping, smacking, and chiseling. Then the mighty crashing blows begin
again, making the boat resound continuously like a giant drum. _Davy
Jones!_ I think--muffled drum and drunken gong. The storm must be
sweeping along now at a good sixty-five miles an hour.
As the bow makes its crashing curtsy, the compartment drops
forward, slanting, steeper and steeper. Our clothes stand out from the
wall at forty-five degrees. My curtain shoots open of itself, my legs
rise helplessly into the air. My head is thrust down--and the room goes
around in a circle as the boat tries to free itself sideways. It doesn't
want to stand on its head. From astern our propellers sound as if they've
spun themselves into a cocoon of cotton wooi. The boat shivers
feverishly, some iron part rattles violently against some other one: a
rolling of drums.
Frenssen favors me with a bored look, then rolls his eyes. "Bumpy,
isn't it?"
"Yes, you might say so."
Finally the propellers race free again. The compartment returns to
horizontal. Our clothes resume the vertical against the walls. And then I
shut my curtain. Why bother? the boat's on its way into the next wave
already.
_Monday_. I haven't been on the bridge for some while. It's time
for me to clamber up again and air myself out. But what's the point? Face
lashed by the waves, blows from a cat-o'-nine-tails, body soaked to the
skin, limbs frozen stiff, aching bones, smarting eyes.
These are, after all, valid objections. Why not stay put? It's
still the best place, here in the Officers' Mess--dry.
A book has fallen from the table. I must have noticed it fall, but
it's only after it lands on the floor that I _see_ it for the first time.
There must be a delay between actual vision and perception. Our nerves
are overstretched like used elastic. I feel a definite urge to pick the
thing up: it can't just lie there! But I ignore this inner voice. I shut
my ears, let the last ounce of initiative seep away. After all, the
book's not doing anyone any harm down there.
The Chief comes in from his engines, sees the book, bends down and
picks it up. So that's that!
He braces himself in his bunk with his knees drawn up and gets a
newspaper out from under his bolster, all without saying a word. He just
sits there sullenly, smelling of oil.
After a quarter of an hour the ensign appears and asks for new
cartridges for the recognition signal. The Chief's reactions are slipping
too: he doesn't hear the ensign, who has to repeat his request in a
louder voice. Finally the Chief looks up angrily. Observing him sideways
I can see his mind slowly trying to tick over. He's struggling to make a
decision. The recognition cartridges are, of course, a serious matter.
And they're in the locker behind his back. Heaven knows whether we'll
ever use them, but their daily change is part of the sacrosanct routine.
Finally he gets up and opens the locker with an expression of the
most extreme repugnance. You'd think someone was holding shit under his
nose. His newspaper slips down off the bunk and lands in a puddle no
doubt left over from the last meal. He suppresses a curse and crouches
back in his corner. This time he draws his knees up even higher. He seems
to be trying to take cover.
Crouching burial, I think; the Chief is re-enacting a crouching
burial. I want to communicate my idea, but I'm too lazy even to speak.
Barely five minutes pass and the ensign is back again. Perfectly
clear: the old cartridges have to be locked away. There can be no
careless handling of recognition cartridges : they can't be left lying
around. I expect the Chief to explode like a bomb. But he doesn't utter a
word. He even gets up with a certain alacrity, shoots a disgusted look at
me, clamps his newspaper under his arm, and disappears aft. Two hours
later I find him in the E-motor room. He's sitting in the general reek of
fumes, on an up-ended chest of prunes, with his back against the stern
torpedo tube, still perusing his newspaper.
After the evening meal my inner voice reminds me that I haven't
been on the bridge all day. I silence it by arguing that it's almost dark
up there by now.
I do need a change, however, so I go off to the bow compartment,
where I'm hit by a solid stench of bilge, remnants of food, sweatdrenched
clothes, and rotting lemons. Two weak lightbulbs give the place the dim
glow of a whorehouse.
I can make out Schwalle holding a big aluminum pot between his
knees. There's a dipper sticking out of it. Around him is a confusion of
bread and sausage and pickles and open sardine cans, and overhead two
low-sagging hammocks weighted down by the bodies of the sleeping offwatch men. The upper berths to left and right are also occupied.
The motion of the boat is worst here in the bow. Every few minutes
the compartment begins to roll and sway violently and each time Schwalle
has to seize the pot so it won't spill over.
Dunlop the torpedo man comes out of the depths of the compartment
on all fours with two lamps, one red and one green, in his hand; he wants
to substitute them for the white ones. It takes him a while to accomplish
this, but he's in ecstasies over the result. Bengal festival lights! His
very own handiwork!
"Sexy," says a complimentary voice from one of the hammocks.
I hear the Gigolo talking to Little Benjamin. "Perfectly clean,
isn't it? How long would you guess I've been wearing this shirt?"
"Certainly since we left port."
"Wrong!" There's triumph in his voice. "Two weeks before that!"
Along with Schwalle, Ario, and the torpedo man Dunlop, Gigolo
Bachmann, Dufte, Fackler, and Little Benjamin (he of the Menjou mustache)
are all sitting on the floor.
The Commander has had the watches shortened. This means that people
are now being thrown together who never used to see one another during
their off-duty hours.
The boat gives an unexpectedly violent jolt. The aluminum kettle
slips out from between Schwalle's legs and splashes soup all over the
bread. The boat heels and begins to corkscrew madly. Next to the door a
waste bucket tips over, spilling its contents of moldy breadcrusts and
squeezed lemon rinds all over the floor. The bilge water gurgles. The bow 
falls with a crash and the whole room shivers. The bilge water shoots
forward roaring.
"Dammit to hell!" Schwalle shouts.
"A pain in the ass--damn, shit, fuck!" Little Benjamin rolls
cursing across the floor, pulls himself up to a sitting position, and
hooks one arm around a bar of the bunk to keep himself upright, crosslegged like a Buddha.
"Don't take up so much room," Ario snaps at him.
"Just give me a minute and I'll breathe myself flat!"
Ario avoids being knocked about too by pushing his left arm around
the taut lifeline that runs along a lower bunk, then he collects the
heavy loaves of bread that are covered with green mold and uses a big
knife to cut off massive pieces. The unspoiled parts are now no larger
than plums. His biceps bulge from the effort.
The boat heels again. But Ario's hooked arm hangs on.
"Like a monkey on a stick!" Schwalle teases him.
"You think it's funny?"
"Take it easy now--I've got first-class references from people
who've been punched in the face by me. All of them were completely
satisfied."
New clattering and scraping. Forward between the bases of the
torpedo tubes a bucket is banging back and forth. No one gets up to make
it fast again. A towel hanging from one of the starboard bunks slowly
unfuris and remains for some time extended diagonally into the room as if
heavily starched.
Ario gives it his full attention. "Fifty degrees at a guess."
The towel slowly sinks back into a reasonable position, then is
plastered against the railing: the boat has heeled to starboard.
"Shit, fucking shit," groans the torpedo man, who has wedged a pail
between the rails and is trying to wash up. His cloth fills the whole
room with a sour stench. The dirty water that was a quiet puddle a few
minutes before is creeping over the floor plates to where the men are
sitting. Ario is starting to get to his feet when the water stops as
though hypnotized and slowly recedes.
Ario wipes the sweat from his forehead with the back of his hand,
clumsily stands up, leans crosswise on a bunk, still careful to keep firm
hold of the bunk support, and peels off his jacket. Black hair sticks out
like stuffing from a torn mattress through the holes in his shirt. His
whole body is dripping with sweat. Snorting, he sits down and tells
everyone that to hell with the weather, he's going to fill his belly so
tight we'll be able to squash fleas on it with our thumbnails. We see at
once that he really means it. Using a not completely moldy remnant of
bread as a base, he carefully heaps it with butter, sausage, cheese, and
sardines.
"The perfect tower of Babel!" is the tribute from the Gigolo. Ario
knows his reputation is at stake and placidly smears a thick layer of
mustard on top. Sounds of noisy enjoyment. The hard dry bread gives his
jaw muscles a thorough workout.
"It's still better than some junk out of a can," he growls.
He finally washes the thick mush down with reddish-yellow tea.
Grease shines at the corners of every mouth: cannibals seated around
their pot. Everyone's legs are interlaced like those in a full railway
car. Now and again a belch from Ario indicates his satisfaction. A bottle
of apple juice goes the rounds.
The door bangs open.
"Jesus! Look at this room!" the bridge johnny complains
indignantly, shaking water from his face and hands.
He's answered with a roar of laughter.
"Say that again!" Fackler jeers.
"The room! Look at this room!" The Gigolo imitates the bridge
johnny and goes on to ask him, "Perhaps something's not quite
satisfactory?" The Gigolo can't contain himself. "Man oh man, what an
expression! 'This room'--almost as good as 'Get the bullets up out of the
cellar.'"
"What's all this about getting bullets out of the cellar?"
"That's the order some imbecile of a watch officer gave during the
last artillery practice. Hadn't you heard? 'Get the bullets up out of the
cellar,' he said, instead of, 'Pass the shells up from the hold'!"
A grin spreads across the bridge johnny's face. He's so plump that
he looks more like the boat's cook than a seaman. His face is in constant
motion. A small black beard is its only fixed feature. He must be goodnatured, for he doesn't mind the kidding; he searches quietly for a place
in the circle and wriggles his way forcibly into an opening.
"Don't take up so much room!" Fackler snaps at him.
But the bridge johnny only smiles at him in a friendly way and
doesn't budge an inch. Fackler becomes incensed. "You're a real pile of
blubber!"
At this the Gigolo takes the bridge johnny's part and addresses him
in pastoral tones. "Now now, don't let the nasty boys upset you."
There's peace for a while. The rattling of the bucket forward
between the torpedo tubes and the noise of eating echo all the louder.
Dunlop the torpedo man steps into the red light of the lamp and
busies himself at his locker. A mass of bottles comes to light. Whatever
he's searching for must be at the very back.
"What d'you want?" Fackler finally asks from his bunk.
"My face cream."
As though this were their long-awaited cue, the whole crowd lets go
at once. "Look at that gorgeous little bathing beauty!"-- "He'll soon be
rubbing ointments into his lovely alabaster body!"-- "Please, please,
you're making me horny!"
The torpedo man turns on them in a rage. "You bastards, you don't
even know there's such a thing as hygiene."
"Come on, don't get so excited!"--"You're a real advertisement for
shipboard hygiene! No doubt you've had a good shit today!" "Just look at
him! Screaming about hygiene while his cock stinks like Gorgonzola!"--"It
would have to be you that talks about hygiene. That's what I like: filthy
as a wild ass and you spread that mess on top. Some hygiene!"
Hacker, the senior man in the bow compartment roars, "Jesus Fucking
Christ, is there going to be peace here or not?"
"Not," says Ario, but so low that the torpedo mechanic can't hear
him in his bunk.
_Tuesday_. The sea's running even higher. The boat pancakes so
suddenly that a violent shudder runs through every rivet--and lasts for
half a minute. The foreship's been rammed so deep into a wave that it
seems unable to free itself, The boat rolls from right to left; I can 
feel it struggling to break out sideways. Finally the bow lifts, the
screws pick up speed, and we feel like a boxer breaking out of a clinch.
I try to keep my breakfast down and even to do some writing. But
the compartment drops so fast that my stomach heaves. We hold on with all
our strength because experience teaches that each downward swoop ends
with a sudden jolt. But this time it goes off smoothly. The screws are
driving powerfully again.
The midday meal consists of sausage and bread. Hot food has been
struck from the menu. There's only cold chow out of cans because the cook
can't keep his pots on the stove. It's a marvel that he even succeeds in
supplying us with hot tea and coffee.
When the meal is over, the Commander wrestles his way to the
bridge, after putting on a thick sweater under his oilskins. Instead of a
sou'wester he's wearing a waterproof rubber hood that sits tight on his
head, leaving only his eyes, nose, and mouth uncovered.
In less than five minutes he's back, dripping wet and sputtering
barely articulate curses. Sullenly he works his way out of the gleaming
wet rubber clothing and drags the sweater over his head; he shows me a
big dark patch that has formed on his shirt during the short time he was
up there. He plumps himself down on the chart chest, and a control-room
mate pulls the boots from his legs. Water pours out of them and gurgles
into the bilge.
While he's wringing out his sodden socks like a mop, there's a gush
of water splatters down from above and hisses back and forth a few times
on the floor before it too finds its exit in the bilge.
"Start the pumps!" he orders, hops barefoot over the wet floor
plates, climbs through the circular door, and hangs up his wet clothes to
dry over the gleaming red heater in the sound room.
He communicates his observations to the navigator, who's pushing
his way past him. "Wind veering to port. So far, all according to
program."
So our storm is behaving correctly, conforming entirely to
expectations.
"Are we to hold course?" the navigator asks.
"Yes, we've got to! As long as we can--and so far we seem to have
managed it."
As though to contradict him, a sharp heeling of the boat sends the
accordion case shooting out of the sound room. The big box smashes
against the opposite wall of the gangway.
"Here's hoping it was empty." The box hurls itself against the
opposite wall, breaks open, and disgorges the instrument. The Chief
thrusts his head into the gangway, examines the wreckage, half curious,
half concerned, and announces, "That's not going to do it any good."
The control-room mate comes crawling rather than running and
gathers up the fragments of the case together with the accordion.
The Commander totters his way through to the Officers' Mess and
settles himself firmly in his corner at the narrow end of the table. He
twists this way and that, shuts his eyes for seconds at a time as though
having to remember how he used to arrange his body, and tries out various
positions until he finds enough support not to be lifted out of his seat
by the next roll of the boat.
All three of us keep our heads bent over our books. After a while
he looks up. "Just read this! It's a perfect description!"
I find the paragraph he's pointing to.
"_The caprice of the winds, like the willfulness of men, is fraught
with the disastrous consequences of self-indulgence. Long anger, the
sense of uncontrolled power, spoils the frank and generous nature of the
West Wind. It is as if his heart were corrupted by a malevolent and
brooding rancor. He devastates his own kingdom in the wantonness of his
force. Southwest is the quarter of the heavens where he presents his
darkened brow. He breathes his rage in terrific squalls and overwhelms
his realm with an inexhaustible welter of clouds. He strews the seeds of
anxiety upon the decks of scudding ships, makes the foam-striped ocean
look old, and sprinkles with grey hairs the heads of ship-masters in the
homewardbound ships running for the Channel. The Westerly Wind asserting
his sway from the south-west is often like a monarch gone mad, driving
forth with wild imprecations the most faithful of his courtiers to
shipwreck, disaster, and death_."
I turn to the title page: Joseph Conrad. _The Mirror of the Sea_.
_Wednesday_. "One good thing about this filthy weather," says the
Old Man. "At least we don't have enemy flyers on our necks."
Hardly any sleep during the night. My bunk tries to toss me out in
spite of the railing--or roll me up the plywood wall. Twice I climb out
because I can't stand it up there any longer. Now I feel as if I hadn't
slept for a week.
The storm shows not the slightest sign of letting up. The day
passes in exhausted dozing. The whole crew is letting itself sink further
and further into apathy.
_Thursday_. The Commander himself reads the final words of the
entry that he has written in the war log. "Wind south-southwest, 9 to 10.
Sea 9. Hazy. Barometer 711.5. Heavy squalls."
"Hazy"--his usual understatement. Steam bath would be more like it.
Overhead it looks as if water and air have united, leaving the world only
three elements instead of four. The storm has grown still wilder--exactly
as the Old Man prophesied.
I get my oilskins down from the hook, wrap a hand towel around my
neck as usual, and fetch my rubber boots from the sound room, where
they've been standing near the heater to dry. I intend to stand watch
with the navigator. Just as I have one boot halfway on, the floor goes
out from under me. I roll in the middle of the gangway like a beetle on
its back. As soon as I find my feet, another lurch knocks me over again.
I finally manage to hoist myself up on the water distributors.
The boots are wet inside. My extended foot will not go into the
shank. It never works very well standing up, so I try it sitting down.
That's better. Should have done it the first time. The next roll pushes
the Commander's green curtain all the way open. He's composing the war
log again, chewing on his pencil. The sentence he's written probably
contains one word too many. The Old Man always acts as if he's concocting
an overseas telegram and each word costs a fortune.
Now the oilskin breeches over the boots. They're wet inside too.
Oilskins--another one of those antiquated expressions; in fact they're
made of rubberized cloth. I suffer some minor dislocations getting the 
trousers as far as my knees. Okay, up off your rear end and on to your
feet! The damn pants continue to fight me. I'm in a sweat before I
finally drag them up over my leather clothes.
And now the oilskin jacket. It's tight under the arms because I
have on two sweaters. They say it's very cold topside. After all, it's
November and we're pretty far north. I really ought to get my bearings
again from the chart. We must be plowing around in the sixties. Probably
not far from Iceland. Actually, we were originally supposed to be heading
for the latitude of Lisbon.
Now the sou'wester. Inside, it's sopping wet. The cold on my scalp
makes me shudder. The straps have been left tied, and the damp has
swollen the knots so much that they can't be undone.
The Commander stops composing his telegraphese, gets up, stretches,
sees me struggling with the straps, and needles me. "Hard life at sea,
isn't it?"
Everything that was hanging is now standing straight out from the
walls. A pair of seaboots slides from one side of the compartment to the
other. I climb elegantly through the hatch, only to be caught in the
control room by the reverse roll. I grab for the low railing on the chart
table and miss, lose my balance completely, and sit down hard on the
flooding and pumping distributor. The Old Man's intoning his damnfool
refrain: "Take care, my pretty pet, you'll lose your balance yet!" Must
have been a hit before my time.
The room tips to port. I'm sent flying against the rounded housing
of the gyrocompass but manage to grab onto the ladder. The Old Man swears
he once saw a Cuban rumba that was absolutely amateurish compared to my
performance. Derisively he acknowledges my balletic gifts . . . and my
obvious predilection for national and native dances.
You have to admit that he's never caught off balance. He'll start
to stagger, and quick as a flash he'll be looking for a suitable landing
place. Taking advantage of the impetus he's given by the rolling of the
boat, he steers himself so as to end up in a dignified sitting position.
Then he usually looks around calmly, as though the one thing he'd had in
mind was to rest his backside on the chart chest.
The Second Watch Officer comes down dripping. A great shower shoots
in behind him. "A hogfish leaped straight over our cannon-- right over
it! We had one of those steep waves at an angle to port, and the hogfish
jumped out of it as if it was a wall, straight over the cannon! Could
hardly believe it!"
I sling the broad safety belt with its heavy snap hook around me
and climb up after him. It's dark in the tower, except for the pale gleam
of the helmsman's instrument dials. Above us there's a gurgling sound on
the bridge. I wait a few seconds until it lets up, then force the heavy
hatch cover up as fast as I can, climb out, and slam the cover down
again. Success! But instantly I have to duck behind the bridge bulwark
along with the rest of them to avoid the next hissing wave. The waterfall
crashes on my back, and eddies tug at my legs. Before they can pull me
off my feet, I attach the snap of my safety belt to the TBT post and jam
myself between the periscope housing and the bridge partition.
Now I can venture my first glance over the bulwark. My god, that's
no ocean out there! What meets my eyes is a quivering graywhite snow
landscape; with the wind stripping a blizzard of foam from its hills.
Dark fissures run through the white: black bands that heave this way and 
that, constantly creating new shapes and patterns. No vault of sky, just
a flat gray plate that's almost resting on the gray-white wasteland.
The air is a fog of flying salt water--an overpowering fog that
reddens the eyes, stiffens the hands, and quickly sucks all warmth out of
the body.
The rounded form of our saddle tank rolls lazily out of a foaming
eddy. The wave that bore us up begins to sink, the boat heels farther and
farther to port and remains there for seconds at a time at an extreme
angle, dropping deeper and deeper.
One white-fluted wave after another moves indolently toward the
boat. Now and again there's one that towers over the rest with a mighty
crest of foam. Immediately in front of the boat the wall of water begins
to curve, slowly at first, then faster and faster, until it breaks on the
foreship with a crash like a monstrous hammer.
"Stand by, danger ahead!" roars the navigator. A geyser foams up
the side of the tower--and breaks over us. A blow on the shoulders, then
water that whirls up from below to rise as high as your belly. The bridge
quivers and quakes. The boat is racked by a violent shudder. Finally the
foreship emerges. The navigator shouts, "Look out--one of those--tear you
right out of the bridge!"
For a couple of seconds the boat is racing through a valley.
Mountainous white waves cut off the view. Then we are lifted once more,
gliding up a gigantic slope. Our circle of vision widens as the boat
rises higher and higher, until it reaches the foaming crest of the wave,
and we look out over the stormy sea as if from a watchtower; it's no
longer the old dark-green Atlantic out there but the ocean of some planet
that's still being torn by the pangs of creation.
The duty period for those on bridge watch has been cut in half.
More would be unendurable. Two hours of ducking down, staring, and
ducking down again, and you're finished. I'm glad I can still move
sufficiently, when my time is up, to get myself below.
I'm so exhausted that I'd be glad to let myself drop onto the floor
plates, wet clothes and all. I'm only vaguely, foggily aware of what I'm
doing.
My eyelids are inflamed. I feel it every time I close them. Best
thing to do is shut your eyes, let yourself go, stretch out. Right here
in the control room. But I'm still conscious enough to make my way aft.
As I lift my right leg to climb through the hatch I almost scream with
pain.
Undressing is only possible given long pauses to get my breath.
Again and again I have to clench my teeth to keep from groaning aloud.
And now the worst, the gymnastics of hoisting myself into my bunk. No
ladder like those in sleeping cars. That final push with the toes of the
left foot, like mounting a horse. My eyes are wet when I finally lie
down.
A whole week of storm! How long is this going to last? Incredible
that our bodies adjust to these torments. No rheumatism, no sciatica, no
lumbago, no scurvy, no diarrhea, no colic, no gastritis, no serious
inflammations. Apparently we are as sound as a bell, as resistant as our
racing diesels.
_Friday_. Another day of depressed dozing and laborious attempts to
read. I'm lying in my bunk. I can hear the sharp splash of water landing
in the control room. The tower hatch must be closed but not made fast, so
when the cockpit is flooded a gush of water always pours through.
The navigator appears from forward and announces that a new man in
his watch has been hit hard. "He's sitting on the floor plates vomiting
nonstop. . . ."
To our amazement he accompanies this with vivid pantomime. We also
learn from him that one of the stokers has come up with an invention
that's catching on fast: he's hung a tin can around his neck like a gas
mask. Three men are already following his example and running around with
"vomit cans," he tells me without a trace of malice.
I can't stay in the same position for more than five minutes at a
time. I use my left hand to hold on to one of the bars of the bunk
railing and twist my body so that I can brace myself against the wall.
But the cold of the iron soon penetrates the thin wood and even the bunk
railing sends icy chills into my hand.
The hatch to the galley opens. I feel the pressure on my ears and
every sound goes flat. The diesel intake doors have gone underwater in
the heavy sea, so the diesels can no longer draw their air through the
outboard pipes. Low pressure--high pressure. Eardrums in, eardrums out--
and you're supposed to be able to sleep. I turn on my stomach and push my
left arm over the edge of the bunk for added support. Before long a
stoker coming off duty lurches in and bangs my arm with the full weight
of his body.
"Ouch!"
"What's that?--Oh! Sorry."
The bunk, which at first sight had seemed too narrow, is now much
too wide. However many different positions I try, I can't find any firm
hold. Finally I remain on my stomach, legs spread wide like a wrestler
trying not to be turned over on his back. Sleep is out of the question.
Hours later I hit on the idea of jamming my bolster between my body
and the bunk railing. Broadside it won't fit but with the narrow end it
works. I now lie firmly wedged between the wooden wall and the bunk
railing.
I see myself as an illustration in my anatomy textbook, printed in
red, in an affected pose, with numbers showing the various muscle groups.
The practical advantage of my anatomy course is that now at least I can
name each muscle that's hurting me. Ordinarily I carry these fibrous
bundles of flesh around on my bones, conscious at most of satisfaction at
the way they contract and relax--a selfsufficient, practical system
intelligently arranged and operating flawlessly. But now the system will
no longer function; it rebels, makes trouble, sends warning signals: a
stitch here, a tearing pain there. For the first time in my life I become
aware of the component parts of this apparatus of mine: the platysma that
I need to move my head; the psoas muscle for moving the bones in my hip.
I have the least trouble with my biceps--they're in training. But my
pectoral muscles are a real problem. I must have been lying all cramped
up--otherwise why should they hurt like this?
_Saturday_. A note in my blue exercise book: "Senseless--joyriding
around in mid-Atlantic. No sign of the enemy. Feels as if we're the only 
ship in existence. Stench of bilge and vomit. The Commander finds the
weather perfectly normal. Talks like a veteran of Cape Horn."
_Sunday_. The daily test dives, usually a bore, have become a
blessing. We long for every minute of relaxation they bring. To be able
to stretch, go limp, breathe deeply and freely for a while instead of
ducking and grasping for handholds; to stand safely, upright and relaxed.
With the command "Stand by to dive!" the ritual begins. "Stand by
to blow tanks!" is next. The Chief has stationed himself behind the two
hydroplane operators. The control-room mates at the compressed-air
controls report, "One!"--"Three, both sides!"--"Five!"
The Chief shouts up to the tower, "Ready to blow!"
"Flood!" comes the voice of the Second Watch Officer from above.
"Flood!" the Chief repeats. The control-room mates open the valves.
"Forward hard down--aft neutral!" The Chief. At "neutral" he has to
raise his voice to be heard over the roar of the water rushing into the
diving cells. At fifty feet he has the trim cells emptied. Instead of the
crashing of the waves we hear the hiss of compressed air and then at once
the roar of water being forced out of the trim cells. At a hundred feet
the hand of the depth manometer stops. The boat is almost on an even keel
but is still rocking so violently that a pencil on the chart table rolls
back and forth.
The Chief has the blowing of the diving cells stopped and the
Commander orders, "Take her down and level off at a hundred forty feet."
But even at that depth the boat is still not at rest. The Old Man takes
up his customary position with his back against the periscope housing.
"Take her to a hundred seventy!" And after a while, "So, peace at last!"
Thank god! The torture has stopped, this time for at least an hour,
as I learn from the Old Man's directions to the Chief.
My head is still full of roaring and crashing, as if I were holding
big seashells to my ears. Quiet only gradually reasserts itself in my
echoing skull.
Now, not a single minute to waste! Quick, up on the bunk. Jesus
God, these pains! I go heavy all over--my stiffly outstretched arms laid
parallel to my body with my hands palm down on the mattress. With my chin
drawn in I can see my ribcage rising and falling. Although I haven't yet
been on the bridge today, my eyes are burning. After all, they're not
fish eyes, designed to peer through salt water. I suck my lips between my
teeth and taste the salt. I lick around my mouth and taste more salt.
Very likely my whole body is covered with it. Sea water has managed to
creep in everywhere. I'm as salty as a well-cured ham or _Kasseler
Rippchen_. _Kasseler Rippchen_--with sauerkraut, bay leaves, peppercorns,
and lots of garlic. With goose fat, even better, and with a glass of
champagne, a feast. Funny thing: the moment the stomach-churning and
jouncing stops, my appetite comes back. How long has it been, in point of
fact, since I last ate?
It's beautiful in my bunk. I've never known how magnificent it can
be just to be here. I make myself as flat as a board and feel the
mattress with every square inch of my back, the back of my head, the
inside of my arms, the palms of my hands. I curl the toes of my right
foot and then the left, stretch out first one leg, then the other. I'm
growing, getting longer all the time. In the loudspeaker there's a sound 
like sizzling fat, then a gurgle, and, finally, a record the Old Man
brought aboard:
Sons ma porte cochère
chante un accordéon,
musique familière
des anciennes chansons.
Et j'oublie la misère
quand vient l'accordéon
sous la porte cochère
de ma vieille maison . . .
I bet _this_ record wasn't a present from his donna, the lady of
the green ink. Where it came from I can only guess. The Old Man? --Still
waters run deep.
Here comes Isenberg to report that lunch is served.
"So early?"
I learn that the Old Man has advanced the midday meal by an hour so
that the men can eat in peace.
At once I begin to worry about the other end of this process.
Eating in peace is all very well--but how are we going to get rid of what
we've digested? I shudder at the thought of the head.
My hesitation is certainly not shared by the Old Man. He consumes
gigantic slices of head cheese spread with thick layers of mustard, with
pickles, sliced onions, and canned bread on the side. The First Watch
Officer painstakingly excises a piece of rind that has a couple of white
bristles in it from his head cheese and pushes it disgustedly to the edge
of his plate.
"Whiskery bastard, isn't it!" says the Old Man, and then, chewing
vigorously, "What we need is beer--and fried potatoes."
But instead of the longed-for beer the steward brings tea. The
Second Watch Officer gets ready to clamp the pot between his thighs as
usual, then realizes that this is no longer necessary and strikes his
forehead theatrically with the palm of his left hand.
The Old Man extends the time underwater by another twenty minutes
"because it's Sunday!"
The men in the petty officers' quarters make use of the underwater
interlude in their usual fashion. Frenssen reports that there was a
bombing attack on the train during his last leave, so he only got as far
as Strasbourg, where he promptly found the cathouse.
"She said she had a specialty. Wouldn't tell me what. I went along.
She gets undressed, lies down. I think, let's see what the surprise is,
and I'm about to hump her, when she says, 'You want a fuck, sweetheart?
My god, how primitive.' And suddenly she takes her eye out, a glass eye,
naturally, and leaves a kind of red role. 'Go ahead, now you can really
eye me!'"
"You goddam pig!"--"Tell that to your grandmother!"--"Of all the
filthy buggers!"--"You make me puke!"--"They ought to cut your prick
off!"
But when the cursing has suhsided the diesel mechanic mate says
equably, "Still it's a first-rate idea, isn't it?"
I feel nausea rising in my throat. I stare at the ceiling and see a
pale blurred face and a dark red hole in the plywood background. Was that 
true? I wonder. Do these things happen? Can anyone actually invent such
monstrosities? Isn't Frenssen simply putting on an act?
I'm still in my bunk when we surface. My whole body is aware of how
the boat begins to move--gently at first. Then I feel like a driver going
around a curve in winter when his rear wheels start to skid. Soon the
whole compartment starts to reel. I hear the first waves batting at us
like huge paws. We're on the surface, and the St. Vitus dance begins
again.
Noises from the control room. The man in there is cursing out loud
because water keeps pouring down on him. I duck through the hatch. When
he sees me he begins again, "Goddam mess! Soon there won't be a safe
place left."
_Monday_. The orderly has work to do. Several men have been
injured. Bruises, a smashed finger, a nail turned violet, blood blisters-
- nothing serious. One man was flung out of his bunk, another in the
control room was hurled against the ventilator. A seaman had his head
banged against the sonar. It's a puncture wound and looks nasty.
"What a mess! I hope he can cope because otherwise I'll have to
take a hand," says the Old Man.
I get ready for the Second Watch Officer's watch at i6.oo. One of
the lookouts is sick. I'm to take his place.
Before I can so much as lift the hatch cover I'm soaking wet. I
wedge myself between the periscope housing and the bridge bulwark as
quickly as I can, and snap on the hook of my safety belt. Only then do I
attempt to force my body upright so that I can look out over the bulwark.
Another sight to take my breath away. Chaos! The waves override
their own ranks, falling on one another's backs as though to tear them
apart.
The boat is poised on the tip of a gigantic wave: a piggyback ride
on a leviathan. For seconds I can look out over the age-old seascape as
if I'm in the gondola of a ferris wheel. Then the boat begins to waver.
The bow searches this way and that, trying to find its goal. Then the
roaring downward slide begins.
Before the boat can right itself in the valley, a second gigantic
wave--tons of crushing weight--smashes down on our upper deck in furious
uproar, rams us behind the knees, covering us completely, whirls and
seethes around our bodies. It seems an eternity before the boat finally
shakes itself free. For just a second the whole length of the foreship is
visible, then the next paw strikes.
The back of my neck is soon burning, rubbed raw by the stiff collar
of the oilskins. The salt water only increases the pain; it burns like
acid.
I have a cut on the ball of my left thumb. It won't heal as long as
sea water can find its way into the wound. The brine is slowly eating us
away. The hell with it all!
And then there's this fierce cold wind. It flays the white skin
from the waves and carries it off in horizontal tatters. It turns the
driven spray to buckshot. When it sweeps over the bridge we have to take
shelter behind the bulwark.
The Second Watch Officer turns around. He grins at me, his face
beaten red. He wants me to see that he's not a man easily impressed by
this sort of knocking about. Above the roaring and the hissing he shouts, 
"Wouldn't it be something--weather like this and no ship under your feet!
And a heavy suitcase in each hand!"
Another blow strikes the tower. A heavy wave smashes down on our
bent backs. But the Second Watch Officer is already up, his eyes focused
on the horizon. He continues to roar. "Water, water, everywhere, and not
a drop to drink!"
I have no desire to compete with the weather, so I simply touch my
forehead when he turns to look at me.
Every time I take the binoculars from my eyes, water runs down my
arms. There's always trouble with the oilskins and more damn trouble with
the glasses! Most of the time there isn't a single pair on the bridge
because they've all been hopelessly fogged by salt water. The men are
always working on them in the control room, but as soon as a pair is well
polished and handed up, it's a matter of minutes for the salt water to
ruin them again. We've long since given up trying to make any use of our
sodden polishing leathers.
Suddenly I grin, remembering the storms they make in sea movies, in
a tank with model ships, and for close-ups a piece of the bridge mounted
on rockers and tilted left, then right, while buckets of water are being
thrown from all sides in the actors' faces. And instead of ducking down,
the heroes stare all around, looking threatening.
Here they could take lessons in the real thing: we're only visible
for seconds at a time. We bend our heads, hunch over, presenting nothing
but the tops of our skulls to the waves. An instant to observe your
sector out of closely narrowed eyes, then down with the face. No matter
how we dodge, the thin whiplashes of spray strike home. There's no
protection against them. A real wave that smashes you straight in the
face is always easier to bear than these fierce, underhand lashes. They
burn like fire.
Immediately I have to take another gurgling cascade full in the
back. Looking down, I see the water eddy around the sides of my boots,
flood up, and ebb sucking away, leaving them like the piles of a wharf.
Another flood, and then another.
The change-over ahead of time is a blessing. The Second Watch
Officer may act as tough as he likes--not even he could endure a full
stint.
Undressing is hard work. Just as I have one leg halfway out of my
trousers, the floor goes from under my feet. I land full length on the
floor plates. Lying on my back on the hand wheels, I finally get both
legs free.
The control-room mate throws me a hand towel. I still have to get
out of a dripping wet sweater and soaked underclothes before I can dry
myself with one hand while I brace myself with the other.
I am terrified of the night. How will I be able to get through the
hours on a mattress that is bucking, swaying, suddenly dropping out from
under me?
_Tuesday_. It's been a week and a half since the storm began, a
week and a half of martyrdom and torture.
In the afternoon I climb onto the bridge. Above us a tattered sky
and the waves leaping at it in unceasing insane attacks; the water seems
to be making a desperate effort to tear itself free from the earth, but 
however high the waves arch and leap, gravity drags them back, collapsing
them with a crash into one another.
The speed with which the waves approach us is breathtaking. The
breakers no longer have a crest of foam; even as each one forms, the
storm snatches it away. The horizon has completely disappeared. I cannot
endure this for more than half an hour. My hands are cramped from holding
on. Water streams down the hollow of my spine and into my trousers.
The moment I am below, the boat resounds with the blows of a
gigantic sledgehammer. The pressure hull quivers in every rib. It creaks
and groans.
_Wednesday_. In the late afternoon I am perched with the Commander
on the chart chest. From the tower down into the control room comes the
sound of violent cursing. It goes on and on until the Commander gets up,
seizes the ladder to the tower hatch, and keeping his head at a safe
distance from the continual trickle of water demands, "What the devil's
going on?"
"Boat keeps swinging to port--hard to hold her on course."
"Don't get excited!" the Commander shouts up. He remains standing
beside the tower hatch, then bends over the chart table. After a short
time he calls for the navigator. All I grasp is, "No longer any point--
hardly any headway over the seabed."
The Commander still hesitates for a while, then over the
loudspeaker system announces, "Stand by to dive!" The controlroom mate,
who has been crouching on the flood distributor like a tired fly, springs
to his feet, heaving a sigh of relief. The Chief comes through the hatch
and gives his orders. There is only the slurping of the bilge water to be
heard and the drumbeat of the waves greatly magnified by the sudden
stillness. A shower of water pours down through the tower; the bridge
lookouts climb down dripping. Two of them immediately take charge of the
hydroplanes; the First Watch Officer is already ordering, "Flood!"
Hissing, the air escapes from the diving cells. We quickly tilt
downward. The bilge water shoots gurgling forward. A shattering blow
smacks into the tower, but the next wave only sounds dull, and the
following ones meet no resistance whatever. More roaring and gurgling,
then silence.
We stand around stiffly, bemused by the sudden peace. The stillness
is like a great wall of insulation between us and the chaotic symphony
above.
The face of the First Watch Officer looks scalded. His lips are
bloodless, his eyes deep in their sockets. There is caked salt on his
cheekbones. Panting, he frees himself from the water-logged towel around
his neck.
The depth manometer shows 130 feet. But the hand moves further over
the dial: i6o, 190. This time we have to go deeper to find quiet. Only
after 210 feet does the Chief balance the boat to an even keel. The bilge
water rips through the stern, then back again. Gradually it settles down:
the roaring and slapping cease. A tin can that has been rolling over the
floor plates now lies motionless.
"Boat in balance," the Chief reports to the Commander.
The First Watch Officer sinks onto the chart chest and dangles his
white, bleached hands between his knees, too exhausted to take off his
wet clothing.
Two hundred ten feet of water over the boat.
We are now as safe from the blows of the waves as though we were
lying in the dead angle of a cannon. The sea protects us from itself.
The Commander turns to me. "No need to keep hanging on." And I
realize that I'm still clinging tightly to a pipe.
The steward brings in the dishes for the evening meal and starts to
assemble the table railings.
"Down with the railings, you there!" the Chief snaps at him and
like lightning reaches to do it himself.
The loaf of bread that the steward brings in has been almost
entirely destroyed by the damp. Admittedly, the green islands of mold
that spring up every day through the brown crust have been wiped away by
Cookie with his stinking dishcloth--but that hasn't helped much. The
bread is penetrated by green mold--like Gorgonzola. In addition, yellow
sulfur-like deposits have made their appearance.
The Chief says, "Don't say anything against mold. Mold is healthy."
He waxes enthusiastic. "Mold is a noble plant, of the same family as the
hyacinth! In this place we should be thankful for anything that grows."
We apply the same patience we would bring to bear on complicated
jigsaws to whittle out the small halfway-healthy cores of the thick
slices. Out of a whole loaf only a fragment remains--smaller than a
child's fist.
"Sunday art," says the Commander contemptuously.
The Second Watch Officer, however, maintains that this bread
sculpture gives him pleasure. While he zealously cuts irregular stars out
of gray slices of bread, he tells us about sailors who have nourished
themselves for months on worms, mouse droppings, and biscuit crumbs. He
embellishes his description with so many details that you could believe
he has experienced it all himself.
Finally the Chief interrupts him. "We know all that, you old Aztec.
That was when you were roaming around the Pacific with LieutenantCommander Magellan, just because the old trophy-hunter wanted some
straits named after him. I see it all. Must have been a hard life!"
_Thursday_. Exhausted. Done for. No lessening of the storm.
Deliverance, finally, toward evening, when the Commander gives the order
to submerge because of limited visibility.
Gradually it falls quiet in the boat again. The Berliner is sitting
close to the control-room hatch, taking a pair of binoculars apart--water
between the lenses.
The radio shack is empty. The radioman is next door in the sound
room. He's put on the headset and is casually turning the wheel of the
sound detector.
In the Officers' Mess the First Watch Officer is busy with his
loose-leaf notebooks--what else! He has even got out a stapler. Funny
that we should have a stapler on board. There's a pencil sharpener as
well. Apparently we're fitted out as a complete office. At least he
leaves the typewriter alone.
The Chief is looking at photos. The Second Engineer appears to be
in the engine room. The Commander is dozing.
Quite unexpectedly the Chief says, "At home they must have had snow
by now."
"Snow!"
The Commander opens his eyes. "Could be--we're already well into
November. Funny thing, it's years since I've seen snow."
The Chief passes his photographs around: snowy landscapes. Figures
like dark blots on pure white. The Chief with a girl, hills with ski
tracks; a fence runs across the left side of the picture. At the base of
the pickets the snow has melted away.
While I stare at the picture, memories return. A mountain town,
shortly before Christmas. The warm security of low-ceilinged rooms.
Tireless hands using all sorts of knives and chisels to carve figures out
of soft pine for the great revolving mechanical Christmas mountain. The
smell of the wood, the warmth of the stove envelop me, along with the
odor of paints and glues, and the sharp aroma of schnapps from the huge
glass in the middle of the table, called the "riding school" because it
goes around and around. The church smell of incense rising in smoking
blue columns from the mouths of the little carved mineworkers and dwarfs
in leather pants, and the wild mountain goblins sculpted out of turnips.
And outside, snow and cold--so piercing it made your nostrils burn when
you breathed. Horse-drawn sleds tinkling with many-toned bells. Steam
from the horses' nostrils white in the light of the harness lanterns.
Illuminated angels everywhere in the windows between banks of moss .
"Yes," says the Old Man. "Real snow for once--that's what I'd like
to see."
The Chief puts his photos away thoughtfully.
The Commander has the time of the evening meal moved up.
"It's specially for the Second Watch Officer," he says. "He's to be
allowed to eat in peace!"
Hardly has the Second Watch Officer washed down his last mouthful,
when the command rings through the boat, "Stand by to surface!"
Immediately my muscles tense.
In the middle of the night the engines are stopped again. I sit up
suddenly, confused, in a half-sleep. The drone of the diesels keeps on in
my head. A single bulb is burning in the compartment. Through the hatch I
hear orders from the control room, spoken low, as though the men were
involved in some secret activity. I hear a hissing. The boat slants
forward. The glow of the lamp moves upward above the hatch. The waves,
still breaking against the body of the boat, sound as if someone were
beating on tightly stretched canvas. Then silence. The breathing of the
off-duty watch is clearly audible.
A man taps his way from the control room through the compartment.
Frenssen catches hold of him. "What's up?"
"No idea!"
"Tell us what's going on--c'mon."
"Nothing special. No visibility now. Black as a bear's ass."
"So that's it," says Frenssen.
I settle myself properly and go to sleep with a feeling of deep
satisfaction.
It must be five o'clock when I wake up again. It's very hot in the
compartment and the fumes from the resting diesels have penetrated the
room. The ventilators are humming. I stretch out comfortably. The bunk
doesn't move. I feel this blessing all the way down to the pit of my
stomach.
_Friday_. The Commander doesn't surface until breakfast is over.
Even at 130 feet the boat is being moved by the groundswell. We soon
break out into the tearing whirlpool and the first waves crash against
the tower. So much water comes down that the bilge is instantly full. And
there's no position in which your muscles can relax.
The direction of the waves must have changed again. Although the
boat has maintained the same course underwater it's now rolling more to
port. At times it holds at an extreme angle for frightening periods of
time.
The navigator reports that the wind has shifted and is now
westsouthwest. That explains it!
"A beam sea--we won't be able to take it for long!" says the
Commander.
But at lunch, while we are laboriously trying to keep ourselves at
the table, he speaks reassuringly. "The waves are coming at a bit of an
angle now. The wind will soon shift. If it comes from astern everything
will be all right."
I decide to stay at the table after the meal. I discover a book
sliding up and down the floor in front of the Second Watch Officer's
locker. I reach for it awkwardly and open it at random. I perceive only
individual words: "Squaresail yard--inner jib--top gallant sail--back
brace--jack block . . ."
Professional vocabulary from the era of sailing ships: beautiful,
proud words. We have nothing to compare with them.
The roaring of the waves along our steel skin swells again and
again in a furious crescendo.
Suddenly the boat heels to port. I am thrown out of my seat, and
the bookcase empties itself completely. Whatever was left between the
railings on the table falls crashing to the floor. The Old Man has braced
himself sideways like a tobogganer putting on the brakes. The Chief has
slid to the floor. We all remain like this for some minutes as though
posing for an old-fashioned camera. The boat will never right itself from
this extreme roll. My god, we can't get out of it!
But after several minutes the compartment tilts back to the
horizontal. The Chief exhales with a shrill siren wheeze. In slow motion
the Commander props himself upright and says, "Man alive!"
"Oha!" someone roars in the bow compartment.
I want to stay huddled on the floor. The room immediately heels to
starboard. The din is even wilder. My god, how can they survive up there
on the bridge!
I pretend to read, but thoughts are whirling through my head. The
boat is sure to make it, says the Commander. More seaworthy than any
other vessel. A ballast keel one yard wide, half a yard deep, filled with
iron bars. A long-armed lever, balanced in the middle. No
superstructures. Center of gravity lies below the structural center. No
other kind of ship could withstand this.
"What's that?" asks the Old Man, looking over at my book.
"Something about sailing ships."
"Hah!" he answers. "A full storm on a sailing ship, there's
something you ought to live through. On a boat like this you don't feel a
thing."
"Thanks!"
"Make fast the tower hatch--that's all we have to worry about. But
on sailing ships--good god! Reefing and furling sails, spare gear lashed
fast to the spars, storm jibs bent on, handlines rigged on deck, hatches
battened down--the work never stops. And then nothing to do but sit in
the cabin and trust to the Lord God. Nothing to eat. And up in the
shrouds again, torn sails to clew up and unreef. New ones to lash on
while you're standing on the jackstays. And then the braces every time
the wind shifts. .
There it is again, that precise, vigorous, powerful language; we're
poorer now that it's gone.
As the room heels to port I get to my feet. I want to go and see
the inclination indicator in the control room.
The inclination indicator is a simple pendulum with a scale. The
pendulum has now swung a full fifty degrees, so the boat is heeling fifty
degrees to starboard. The pendulum remains stationary at fifty, as though
nailed at this extreme, because the boat hasn't righted itself. I can
only explain this by supposing that a second wave must have crashed over
her before she could free herself from the first. Now the pendulum moves
even further--to sixty degrees. And for an instant it reaches sixty-five!
The Commander has followed me. "Looks impressive," he says behind
me, "but you have to subtract something, because the pendulum's own
momentum carries it too far." For the Commander to be really
disconcerted, the boat would probably have to be sailing keel up.
The men on duty in the control room are now wearing oilskins, and
the bilge has to be bailed almost continuously. It seems to me that the
pumps are running nonstop.
The navigator lurches into the room, like a man with a broken foot.
"Well?" The Commander turns to him.
"Since midnight a drift of fifteen miles may be assumed."
"You could really express yourself a little less tentatively.
You're always right." The Commander adds under his breath, for my
benefit, "He's always that cautious, but in the end his calculations work
out almost exactly. It happens every time."
A radiogram has arrived; the Commander is handed the slip of paper.
Bending over his arm, I read the message with him. "Impossible to reach
area of operations at designated time because of weather--UT."
"We'll copy that and sign it with our own initials," says the
Commander. Then he pushes himself to his feet and, calculating how much
the boat will heel, staggers forward. Soon he's back with a half unfolded
chart that he spreads out on the chart chest.
"This is where UT is--almost directly in our line of advance. And
here is where we are."
I can see that these two points are some hundreds of miles apart.
The Commander looks morose. "If it's all part of the same depression,
then good night! It looks like an enormously extended storm system, and
there's no indication it's going to move on soon."
Thoughtfully he folds up the chart and pushes back the sleeve of
his sweater so that he can read his watch. "Not long till dinner," he
says, as though to sum up the whole point of the radiogram and his
reactions.
When dinner time comes and the Commander appears in the Officers'
Mess I can't believe my eyes--he's wearing oilskins. The others stare at
him as if there's a stranger on board. We can hardly see anything of his
face, he has wrapped himself up so completely.
"This evening's dinner dress will be oilskins," the Old Man murmurs
and grins at us from between the collar of his oilskin jacket and the
lowered brim of his sou'wester as though through the slit in a visor.
"Well, gentlemen?" he asks impatiently. "Not hungry today? Just when the
cook has brought off this magnificent coup: soup in this weather!"
It takes a while for us to rouse ourselves, and then like obedient
children we tumble into the control room where the foul-weather gear is
hanging. The famous statue of Laocöon conjures itself up before my eyes
as I watch the contortions and corkscrew maneuvers the engineers and
Watch Officers have to perform to get into their still-wet gear.
Finally we sit down around the table, looking like carnival
figures. The Commander is bursting with mischievous pride.
Suddenly there's a crash in the gangway: the steward has landed on
his stomach. His hands are above his head, still clutching the soup
tureen. Not a drop has been spilled.
"It's never got the better of him yet!" says the Commander,
unmoved, and the Chief nods in agreement.
"And no rehearsal--a performance like that first time around-- he's
really something!"
The Second Watch Officer serves the soup--consisting of potatoes,
meat, and vegetables--while I hold on to the safety belt under his
oilskin jacket. Nevertheless, he's only got to the second man before he
empties a whole ladleful onto the table.
"Goddammit!"
Whereupon the Chief lets his half-full plate spill, substantially
increasing the pond of soup in front of us. Pale chunks of potato float
about in the dark-brown brew between the railings--blocks of ice from a
glacier that's just calved. The next time the boat heels, only the potato
is left on the table; the soup has found its way under the railings,
slopping into the laps of the Commander and the Chief.
The Commander casts a triumphant glance around the table. "You
see?" He can hardly wait for more soup to overflow.
The Second Watch Officer's gurgling laughter is interrupted by a
dull crash. The Commander's grin freezes. Immediately he's all attention.
The Chief springs up to get out of his way as word comes from the control
room: "Chart chest overturned."
Through the hatch I can see four men struggling to put the heavy
iron box back in its place.
The Commander looks disconcerted, then mutters to himself,
"Incredible. That chest has been there since this boat was commissioned
and has never moved so much as an inch."
"No one at home will believe it," the Chief remarks. "They simply
can't imagine it. On our next leave we ought to invent a U-boat game. Go
without shaving or washing for months. No change of linen, into bed with
boots and stinking leather clothes on. Brace your knee against the table
while eating, and instead of serving spinach on a plate, plop it down on
the table top . . ."
The Chief gulps a couple of mouthfuls and goes on elaborating his
plan. "And if the telephone rings, yell 'Alarm!' like a madman, knock
over the table, and rush for the door like greased lightning."
_Saturday_. The gusts have once again become a single prolonged
blast that pummels the boat head on.
The barograph is drawing a steep line downward.
"I'd just like to know," says the Old Man, "how the Tommies keep
their scows together in such heavenly weather. They can't make the whole
damn convoy heave to. And the boys on those tin can destroyers--they'll
be having quite a time of it!"
I remember trips on destroyers at force five. That was enough. Full
speed was out of the question. At six our destroyers don't leave the
harbor at Brest. Time off. But the British destroyers can't pick and
choose their weather. They have to furnish convoy protection in any
storm--even this one.
In the afternoon I disguise myself as a great seadog and climb the
ladder. I wait close under the hatch cover until the water has gushed
away, push the lid open, and climb out. Kicking the hatch shut and
fastening the snap of my safety belt I do in one motion.
A wave like the back of a gigantic whale rises obliquely in front
of the boat. It gets bigger and bigger, loses its hump and straightens up
into a wall. The wall becomes concave, rushes toward us, gleaming glassygreen. And now our bow plunges into it. "No longer--" The Second Watch
Officer has hardly begun when the wave crashes against the tower. The
boat reels.
"--any use," the Second Watch Officer completes his sentence a
minute later.
I know of times when the whole deck crew has been torn out of a
bridge cockpit by an oversized wave, without anyone in the boat knowing a
thing about it. Such murderous waves are created at random from the
piling of one swell upon another. Against a giant of that kind no safety
belt holds.
What must it feel like to lie there in the water, in your sodden
gear, and see the boat moving away--smaller and smaller, hidden
momentarily behind the waves and then gone for good. You're done for,
_fini_. And the expression on the face of the first man to discover that
the whole bridge watch has disappeared, that the boat is wandering
blindly through the seas . . .
We're making slow speed; more would be dangerous. The boat could
dive involuntarily. There have been instances of boats running too fast
in a heavy sea and being driven at an angle down one mountainous wave and
into the next, like a dowel, carried by their own momentum to a depth of
a hundred feet or more, The bridge watch came close to being drowned. And
if too much water were to pour in through the diesel intake pipes, a boat
could actually sink.
The Second Watch Officer turns his red face toward me. "I'd like to
know how much progress we're really making!"
Suddenly he shouts, "Heads down!"
Which means: duck and hold your breath.
I just have time to see the open-mouthed Officer, the green
mountain that's rising to the left in front of our tower, and the great
white paw that extends from it hesitating. Then it strikes with
thundering force on the side of the foreship. The boat sags way over
under the blow. Down with your head! A boiling surge hisses over the
bridge, submerges it. We no longer have a ship under our feet.
But now the same wave lifts the boat up. The bow extends clean out
of water and hangs for a while in midair until the wave lets the boat
fall. Water rushes off through tl1e scuppers and the open afterend of the
cockpit. Foaming whirlpools tear at our legs.
"Too damn much," growls the Second Watch Officer. Then just as the
next wave is running through under the boat he has the hatch opened and
word passed down. "To the Commander: Visibility much impaired by breaking
waves. Request alteration of course three hundred degrees."
For a moment radio music rises from the open tower hatch. Then a
voice from below. "Three hundred degrees course authorized."
"Alter course to three hundred degrees," the Second Watch Officer
orders the helmsman. Slowly the boat turns until the waves are coming
obliquely from astern. Now it will perform like a rocking horse.
"Heading three hundred degrees," comes the voice of the helmsman
from below. The tower hatch is closed again.
My face burns if I rub my sleeve over it. I've no idea how often
I've been caught by the whiplashes. I'm only surprised that my eyes
aren't swollen shut. Every blink is painful. My eyelids seem to have
puffed up double. My god, what punishment!
I nod wordlessly to the Second Watch Officer, wait for a swirling
whirlpool to subside, pull open the hatch, and disappear below.
Bottomless depression overwhelms me. This martyrdom is a test of
endurance, an exercise to determine the limits of our capacity for pain.
The radioman picks up SOS calls from several ships.
"The cargo hatches on the freighters must be getting smashed, and
the holds filling with water. The waves'll be making matchwood of the
lifeboats too."
The Old Man describes various kinds of storm damage that can
afflict an ordinary ship. "If the steering mechanism breaks down on one
of those barges or they lose a screw, there's nothing the crew can do but
pray."
The roar of the water, the rattling of spray, and the hissing of
the bilge form background music to the dull resounding thump of the waves
on the foreship.
I can only marvel that this wild upheaval hasn't rent our seams,
that the boat hasn't begun to buckle. Some dishes and a few bottles of
apple juice are all that have been broken so far. It seems that the waves
can do nothing to the ship itself. But they are forcing _us_ gradually to
our knees. The machines hold up--only we mere men are poorly constructed
for such torment.
I can tell by the paucity of radio activity how unsuccessful the Uboats are being. Requests for position reports, routine signals, test
transmissions--that's all.
I'm suddenly reminded of a passage in Joseph Conrad's _Youth_, when
the bark _Judea_, with a cargo of coal for Bangkok, runs into an Atlantic
winter storm which little by little destroys the ship: the bulwark, the
stays, the lifeboats, the ventilators, the deckhouse, along with the
galley and the crew's quarters! And how they man the pumps, from captain
down to cabin boy, slaving for their lives, lashed to the mast--day and
night. The sentence, "We had forgotten what it was like to feel dry,"
remains in my mind.
This memory brings me comfort now: The sea cannot drown us. No
other kind of ship is as seaworthy as this one.
_Sunday_. Before taking even the most trivial action I have to
struggle with myself. Should I even bother--or would it be just as well
not to?
It's the lack of sleep that undermines our strength most of all.
The only real peace comes when there's no visibility at all and the
Commander orders a dive. Once the boat is balanced, you rarely hear so
much as a raised voice, Decks of playing cards lie idle. During the hour
or two that we're underwater, everyone tries to get some sleep.
The quiet in the submerged boat disconcerts me every time. When all
the men are lying in their bunks or on the floor overcome by exhaustion,
it's as though the boat had been deserted by her crew.
_Monday_. I summon up enough energy to note in my diary:
"Impossible to serve meals. Whole thing meaningless. Dive shortly before
two o'clock. Marvelous: We stay down. More and more inflammations.
Carbuncles of the worst kind. Inflamed scabs. Icthyol ointment on
everything."
_Tuesday_. The Commander writes up the day just past in the war
log:
13.00 Both engines turning over fast enough to achieve half speed.
But we remain almost stationary.
13.55 Dive on account of bad weather.
20.00 Surface. Still heavy sea. Use of weapons limited.
22.00 Proceeding submerged because of weather conditions.
01.31 Surface. Heavy seas. Limited visibility.
02.15 Boat hove to because of very heavy seas.
_Wednesday_. The wind shifts to the southeast. Its strength has
increased again to eleven. "Very heavy seas from east to southeast.
Barometer falling sharply."
In the control room the navigator is braced with spread legs
against the chart table. As I try to look over his shoulder he glances up
moodily and growls, "Ten days with no fixed bearing. And these crazy
waves and winds must have pushed us miles off course."
_Thursday_. In the half-light of dawn the navigator decides to try
his luck once more. Visibility has in fact somewhat improved. Here and
there the sky is torn open to reveal a few stars. The horizon can be
glimpsed when it's not being cut off by the humps of wandering waves.
Then it looks like a straight furrow interrupted by large hummocks.
But whenever the navigator gets ready and has located a known star,
spray comes shooting over the bridge and makes the sextant unusable. He
has to hand the instrument down to the control room and wait for it to be
dried and handed up again. After a quarter of an hour he gives up. "An
inaccurate navigational reading is just as bad as none at all!" he says
as he climbs down. He'll try again at dusk.
_Friday_. "A shitty life!" the Chief announces at breakfast.
"Our search methods," I tell the Old Man, "remind me of certain
fishing techniques they use in Italy." I pause for effect the way he does
after tossing out one of his lures. Not until he says, "Really?" do I go
on. "I've seen fishermen around Venice let down huge square nets from the
piers over a kind of framework of poles. They wait a while and then hoist
the nets up by pulleys--in the hope that some fish or other will be
dimwitted enough to stick around,"
"That sounds like criticism of the High Command!" the Chief breaks
in.
"Clear case of undermining military discipline!" remarks the Old
Man. And the Chief announces, "What we need is brains in the right
places. Out with those clowns in High Command and let's have you on the
Staff instead to get things done!"
"And we can install the Chief in the National Museum!" I'm able to
shout after him just as he disappears into the control room.
_Saturday_. It's six forty in the morning when a vessel is reported
on our port quarter. Wind eight to nine, sea eight. Visibility wretched.
It's remarkable that the bridge watch was able to make the ship out so
soon in the uniformly gray pea soup. Probably a lone vessel tacking
sharply.
We're in luck. We're ahead of this dark shadow that rises
momentarily from behind a foaming sea and then disappears for long
minutes at a stretch as though by magic.
"He probably thinks he's traveling faster than he is. Can't be
making more than fourteen knots! He'd have to take a huge tack in the
wrong direction to get away from us," says the Old Man. "Let's edge up a
little closer. He certainly can't see us against the clouds."
Not more than ten minutes go by before the Commander orders a dive.
The torpedo watch is sent to battle stations.
Engine-room orders. Hydroplane orders. And then, "Stand by for
single shots, tubes one and three!"
How is the Commander going to attack in this sea? Bet everything on
a single card is probably his strategy now--come hell or high water he
wants to score.
The Commander himself gives the firing data without betraying the
slightest excitement. "Enemy speed fourteen. Bearing one hundred.
Distance three thousand feet."
The First Watch Officer reports, "Tubes ready," almost as casually.
But suddenly the Old Man bursts out cursing and orders reduced speed,
probably to cut down on periscope vibration.
The periscope motor hums and hums, stopping only for brief
intervals. The Old Man is doing his best to keep the enemy in sight
despite the high waves. Apparently he's now extending the asparagus stalk
still farther. In these waves he's not running much risk. Who aboard the
steamer could conceivably guess that a U-boat might attack in this chaos?
Experience and theory both teach that in weather like this a U-boat can't
use its weapons. We tumble through the waves.
The Commander calms down. "Easily ten thousand tons. Has a
murderous cannon--aft. Goddam these rain squalls!"
"No good," we suddenly hear from the tower. "Surface!" The Chief
reacts quickly. The first heavy wave that hits us hurls me straight 
across the control room, but I'm able to catch hold of the chart table
and keep my footing.
The Commander calls me to the bridge.
Low-hanging, dark-gray curtains all around us over the raging sea.
No trace of the steamer. It has disappeared in the rain squalls.
"Careful!" the Old Man warns as a bottle-green wave rushes toward
us.
When it's roared by, he shouts in my face, "They couldn't possibly
have seen us!"
He orders us to push on in the general direction of the steamer. To
do this we have to run at high speed against the waves. The wind lashes
our faces. I manage to endure this for barely ten minutes and then go
below in a gush of water. The Chief has to bale every few minutes.
"Senseless," he announces shortly. "They've got away after all!"
Despite the dousing spray I venture a sidelong glance into the
tower. Little Benjamin is at the helm. A good man--he has to use every
effort to keep the boat on course. Even out of sight of the rolling waves
I can feel the bow being constantly forced off course. The hatch is
sealed again. The only connection from the bridge to the interior is the
speaking tube.
The Old Man orders us down to listen. He's determined not to give
up. The sonar should reach farther than our sight.
Dripping wet, with lobster-red faces, the bridge watch comes down.
We descend to 130 feet. It gets still as death in the boat. Only
the bilge slops back and forth, from the groundswell. All of us except
the two bridge lookouts sitting at the hydroplane controls have our eyes
on the sound man. But no matter how diligently he turns his wheel--
nothing! The Old Man orders, "Course sixty degrees!"
After half an hour he has us surface again. Has he finally given
up? I go on deck with the navigator's watch. The Commander remains below.
The kind of view we have of the stormy waves is usually reserved
for shipwrecked men. We might as well be on a raft.
"Bone-grinders," roars the navigator. "Watch out--a lookout on a
boat once That's as far as he gets because there in front of us is a
wave preparing to strike. I brace myself diagonally against the bulwark,
pressing my chin against my chest.
The water has barely gurgled away when the navigator goes on in the
same hoarse shout. ". . . he had three ribs broken--safety belt tore--
hurled aft--straight onto the machine gun--lucky for him!"
After the boat has taken on the next three waves he whirls around,
removes the stopper from the speaking tube, and shouts down, "To the
Commander: No more visibility!"
The Commander listens to reason. Another dive, another full sonar
search, Still nothing.
Is it worthwhile to peel off our dripping clothes? The hydroplane
operators have even kept on their sou'westers. Within half an hour
they're proved right. The Commander has us surface again.
"There's only one chance left: If he makes a big tack--a major
alteration in course--it'll lose him his head start," says the Old Man.
For a good half hour he sits still, frowning, his eyes half-closed.
Then something suddenly brings him to his feet. His abruptness makes me
jump. He must have heard something from the bridge. Even before the
report comes that the steamer's in sight again, he's at the hatch.
Alarm again. Dive.
When I get to the control room he's sitting in the tower behind the
periscope eyepiece. I hold my breath. When the raging sea lets up for a
moment I hear him cursing under his breath. He's having his troubles
again. How can he keep the steamer in the periscope for more than seconds
at a time in an ocean like this?
"There he is!"
The cry from above startles me. We stand firmly braced, waiting,
but nothing more is heard from above.
The Old Man bursts into loud curses because he can't see anything.
Then orders to the helmsman. And now--I can't believe my ears--the Old
Man wants both E-motors at full speed. In this weather?
Another three or four minutes, then, "Crash dive to two hundred
feet!" We stare at one another. The control-room mate looks dumbfounded.
What does this mean?
It takes the Old Man to relieve our uncertainty; he climbs down the
ladder, announcing, "Hard to believe--they saw us! The scow turned
directly at us; they were going to ram us. What a nerve--and what a dirty
trick. Incredible!"
He struggles for self-control, and loses. Furiously he slams a
glove down on the floor plates. "This filthy weather--this goddam . . ."
Completely out of breath, he sits down on the chart chest and sinks into
apathetic silence.
I stand around, feeling embarrassed and hoping against hope that
we're not going to surface again too soon.
_Sunday_. We're proceeding underwater. The crew is probably
secretly praying for bad visibility; bad visibility means staying under
and staying under means peace.
We have become haggard old men, half-starved Robinson Crusoes,
though there's no shortage of food. It's just that nobody has the
faintest desire to touch the stuff.
The engineers have had the worst of it. They no longer get any
fresh air at all. For more than fourteen days now it's been impossible to
go on deck. Admittedly, the Commander has permitted smoking in the tower,
"under the spreading chestnut tree," but the first man who tried to light
a cigarette there instantly had his match blown out. The draft is
impossible when the diesels are sucking air out of the boat.
Even Frenssen has become monosyllabic. The evening "uproar in the
cable locker," the gabble and singing in the bow compartment, have also
ceased.
Only the sound room and the hydroplane stations are i11 action. The
control-room mate and his two assistants are on duty, along with the Emotor personnel. The helmsman in the tower has to fight against falling
asleep.
One of the motors is humming. I've long since given up trying to
figure out which one. The boat's making five knots, much slower than a
bicycle rider and yet faster than we'd be doing on the surface.
Our lack of success weighs heavily on the Old Man, who's getting
moodier each day. He never was all that loquacious, but he's hardly
approachable at all now. You'd think from his depression that the success
or failure of the entire U-boat campaign was his responsibility.
The humidity in the boat still seems to be worsening daily.
A vintage season for mold: it's already taken possession of my
spare shirts. It's different from the variety that produces such
spectacular growth on the sausages: less virulent, it forms big
blackgreen stains instead. The leather of my sports shoes is filmed with
green, and the bunks reek of it. They must be rotting from the inside
out. If I leave my seaboots off for a single day, they turn greenishgray
from mold and salt.
_Monday_. Unless I'm very much deceived, the storm has abated a
little.
"Perfectly normal," says the Old Man at breakfast. "No reason to
rejoice. We may even have reached a fairly quiet zone--depends if we've
hit the eye of the storm. But if we have, it's absolutely certain that
the whole performance will start up again once we hit the other side."
The waves are just as tall as yesterday, but the bridge lookouts
are no longer being constantly whiplashed by flying spray. Now and again
they can even venture to use their binoculars.
_Tuesday_. I no longer have to look around for handholds whenever I
want to cross the control room. We can even eat without table rails and
we no longer have to brace the pots painstakingly between our knees.
There's a real meal: Navy bacon with potatoes and brussels sprouts. I can
feel my appetite returning as I eat.
After the change of the night watch, I drag myself out of my bunk.
The circle of the sky framed in the tower hatch glows barely brighter
than the black rim of the hatch itself. I wait a good ten minutes in the
control room propped against the navigator's table before asking,
"Permission to come on the bridge?"
"_Jawohl!_" The voice of the Second Watch Officer.
_Bommschtjwumm_--the waves are booming against the boat, the sounds
interspersed with a sharp hissing and then a dull roar. Pale braids of
foam gleam on either side and blend into the darkness.
The water shimmers green down the length of the boat, as if lit up
from within, making a silhouette of the boat's hull against the darkness.
"Damn phosphorescence!" the Second Watch Officer growls. Moonlight
floods down behind the scattered bands of mist. Now and again a star
sparkles and is gone.
"Black as hell," mutters Dorian. Then shouts to the stern lookouts,
"Look alive, you men!"
As I climb down into the control room at about 23.00 I see two
control-room mates at work over the water distributor. On closer
inspection, I see they are grating potatoes.
"What in the world?"
Then the Old Man's voice comes from behind me. "Potato pancakes, or
whatever the things are called."
He takes me with him into the galley. There he asks for a frying
pan and some fat. A seaman comes from the control room with a bowl of
grated potatoes. Happy as a schoolboy, the Commander lets the fat melt in
the frying pan, which he raises to let the hissing lard run from side to
side. Then the mixture is dropped in from a height. Hot fat spatters onto
my trousers. "Almost time to launch the first one!" The Old Man wrinkles
his nose, inhales the rising aroma, strikes an attitude. The great moment 
has come. A flip, and the pancake flies through the air, performs a
somersault and lands back in the pan again, perfectly flat, and golden
brown.
Each of us tears a piece from the first one that's done and holds
it between bared teeth until it's cooled a little. "Neat, eh?" the
Commander asks. Cookie has to get up out of his bunk and fetch big cans
of apple sauce.
Gradually the finished pancakes pile up into a respectable heap.
It's midnight: change of watch in the engine room. The door flies open
and the Gigolo comes into the galley, smeared with oil. Disconcerted, he
stares at the Commander and is about to rush on through, but the
Commander shouts, "Halt! Stop!" The Gigolo freezes as though riveted to
the floor.
Now he's commanded to close his eyes and open his mouth and the
Commander stuffs in a rolled-up potato pancake, then smears a spoonful of
apple sauce on top. The Gigolo's chin gets a layer as well.
"About face! Next!"
The procedure is repeated six times. The watch coming on duty gets
exactly the same treatment. We eat so fast that the pancakes are gone in
no time. Already the bottom of the bowl is bare.
"Next batch for the sailors!"
It's one o'clock before the Commander stretches and rubs the sweat
from his face with the sleeve of his jacket. "Go ahead, eat it up!" he
says, pushing the last pancake my way.
_Wednesday_. In the afternoon I go up with the second watch. The
waves have changed completely. No more mountain ridges advancing with
long, unbroken slopes to windward and abrupt declivities in the lee. The
ordered phalanx of waves has given way to mad confusion; as far as the
narrowed eye can see through the blowing spray, the watery landscape is
in upheaval. Huge masses of water are being hurled aloft in every
direction, and the waves have no lines at all. The wind must have raised
a new groundswell over the old one, making mountainous rollers collide
with powerful cross-seas.
Hardly any visibility. No horizon. Only watery vapor right before
our eyes. "These damn seas!" the navigator growls. The boat executes a
kind of reeling dance, starting and stumbling, wavering back and forth,
unable to find any rhythm at all.
New torment. It's turned cold again. The icy blasts of the wind cut
my wet face like knives.
_Thursday_. The wind's blowing from the northwest; the barometer's
still falling. I become obsessed with the crazy hope that it's going to
rain oil--a downpour of oil to smooth the seas.
The Commander appears at dinner, looking morose. For a long time
there's silence. Then he smiles with clenched teeth. "Four weeks! Not bad
going!"
We've been taking this pounding for a good four weeks.
The Old Man strikes the table with his left fist; he takes a deep
breath, holds it, finally blows it out noisily through closed lips,
closes his eyes, and lets his head hang to one side: a picture of
resignation. We sit around, wallowing in our misery.
The navigator reports that the horizon is clearing, so the
northwest wind must have blown away the low-hanging clouds and given us
back our sight.
_Friday_. The sea is a huge, green tattered quilt, shedding its
white lining at every tear. The Commander tries every possible trick to
protect the boat from the waves--sealing the watertight forecastle,
blowing the diving cells--but nothing helps. Finally there is nothing
left but to alter course.
With aching eyes I scan holes, trenches, folds, gullies, and
channels out into the distance--but there's no darker spot--nothing! We
no longer even think about aircraft. What plane could stay aloft in this
storm? Whose eye could spot us in this tumult? \Ve aren't even leaving a
wake, so there's no trail to betray us.
Once more we shoot into a valley while the next wave rises
diagonally behind us. The Second Watch Officer stares at it but doesn't
duck--he just stands there stiffly as if smitten with lumbago.
"Something there . . ." I hear him roar, but the sea has already
hit the tower. I press my chin against my chest, hold my breath, brace
myself, become a dead weight to prevent the sucking whirlpool from
dragging me off my feet. Then up with the head again to search the
heaving waves. One trough after the other.
Nothing.
"There was something there!" the Second Watch Officer shouts again.
"At two hundred sixty degrees!"
He bawls at the port lookout aft: "Hey--you--see anything?"
Once again we are carried upward by a roaring elevator. I'm
standing shoulder to shoulder with the Second Watch Officer, and there! A
dark shape suddenly heaves up under the blowing spray-- next moment it's
gone.
A barrel? And how far off?
The Second Watch Officer pulls out the plug and presses the
speaking tube to his mouth. Ordering binoculars. The hatch is thrust open
from below and the glasses handed out just in time to avoid the next
flood. The Second Watch Officer hastily kicks the hatch shut. The
binoculars remain more or less dry.
I duck down beside him as he protects the glasses from the spray
with his left hand, waiting tensely for the floating object to rise
again. But there's nothing to be seen except a tumult of white-striped
hills. We're in a deep trough.
As we rise again, we narrow our eyes, try to concentrate.
"Goddammit, dammit, dammit!" Abruptly the Second Watch Officer
claps the glasses to his eyes. I stare at him. Suddenly he roars,
"There!" No doubt about it. He's right: there was something! And again! A
dark shape. It soars up, pauses for a couple of heartbeats, and sinks out
of sight again.
The Second Watch Officer puts the glasses down and shouts, "That
was actually. . ."
"What?"
The Second Watch Officer bites off a syllable between his teeth.
Then he turns his face full at me and bursts out, "That--must be--a
submarine!"
A submarine? That corkscrewing barrel a submarine? Am I hearing
things? He must be crazy!
"Fire a recognition rocket?" asks the bosun's mate.
"No--not yet--wait a bit--not absolutely certain!" The Second Watch
Officer bends over the speaking tube again. "Leather cloths to the
bridge! And fast!"
He hunches down behind the bulwark, like a harpooner on a whaling
ship preparing to strike, and waits for us to be lifted up again. I fill
my lungs to their bursting point and hold my breath-- as if this would
improve my sight as I stare out over the boiling waves.
Nothing!
The Second Watch Officer hands me the binoculars. I brace myself
like a mountain climber in a rock chimney and swing the glasses through
z6o degrees. A circular section of gray-white sea. Nothing more.
"There!" roars the Second Watch Officer and flings out his right
hand. I hastily hand him the glasses. He stares doggedly then puts the
glasses down. One leap and he's at the speaking tube. "To the Commander:
submarine on our port quarter!"
The Second Watch Officer hands me the binoculars. I don't dare lift
them because a huge wave is rising astern. I cling fast and try to
protect them with my body, but the swirling flood rises to my navel.
"Dammit!"
The gigantic wave is taking us up. I put the glasses to my eyes,
search for two to three seconds across the raging watery waste--and there
I have it. No doubt about it: the Second Watch Officer is right. A
conning tower. A few seconds, and it's gone like a ghost.
As the wave drains away the hatch ffies open. The Commander pushes
himself up and gets the details from the Second Watch Officer.
"You're right!" he mutters from under the binoculars.
Then: "They aren't diving, are they? Surely they can't be. Quick,
bring up the signal lamp!"
The seconds pass, but despite three pairs of eyes, there's nothing
more to be seen. I catch a distracted look on the Commander's face. Then
a speck appears in the light greenish gray--the up-ended barrel!
The Old Man orders an approach with both engines. What does he
intend to do? Why isn't he firing a recognition signal? Why hasn't the
other boat? Can they have missed us?
Spray and foam are dashing heavily across the bridge, but I push
myself higher. An alpine ridge with snow-covered summits is bearing down
on us from astern. For a couple of heartbeats I'm petrified: The first
gigantic wave could rise at the wrong moment and break over us. Then
there's a sharp hissing: It's running past, under the boat-- but the next
instant it's thrown up a huge wall in front of our eyes, as high as a
house. And the next wave cuts us off from astern.
Suddenly the tower of the other boat appears, high over the foaming
crests, like a cork shot out of a bottle. The cork dances for a while,
then disappears. Minutes pass, and there's nothing to be seen.
The Second Watch Officer is shouting--not words, just an
inarticulate roar. The Commander raises the hatch cover and bellows down:
"How long do I have to wait for that lamp?"
It's handed up. The Commander wedges himself between the periscope
housing and the bulwark and grips the lamp with both hands. I brace
myself against his thighs to give him more support and leverage. I can
already hear him pressing the key: _dot--dot--dash_. He stops. That's it. 
I steal a quick glance around. The other boat is gone; it might as well
have been sucked into an abyss. Nothing to be seen but a watery gray
wilderness.
"Crazy! Absolutely crazy!" I hear the Commander say.
Then, before I can spot the tower of the other boat again, there's
a flash in the heaving gray: A white sun glares at us through the flying
spray, goes out, glares again: _dot--dash--dash_. For a while, nothing;
then more glare in the general chaos.
"That's Thomsen!" roars the Old Man.
Braced at an angle, I hang onto his left thigh with all my
strength; the Second \Vatch Officer is now beside me, hanging onto the
right. Our lamp is in action again. The Commander is sending a message,
but I have to keep my head down, so I can't see what he's tapping out.
However, I can hear him dictating loudly. "Maintain--course-- and--speed-
-we--will--come---closer . . ."
A mountain of water greater than any we've seen is overtaking us.
White spindrift whirls from its crest in plumes like clouds of powdered
snow. The Commander hands down the lamp and quickly lowers himself, using
our shoulders for support.
My breath is cut short. The roaring and hissing of this four-story
wall drowns out the noise of all the others. We press our backs against
the forward bulwark. The Second Watch Officer has his forearm in front of
his face for protection, like a boxer.
No one has eyes for the other boat. We stare at this gigantic wave
that is approaching us with unearthly deliberation, heavy as lead, slowed
down by its own monstrous bulk. On its back the foam glints wickedly. The
nearer it comes, the more it swells, rising higher and again higher above
the gray-green tumult. Suddenly the wind ceases. Little waves splash
aimlessly around the boat. Then it dawns on me: This father of all waves
has thrown up a great barrier against the storm. We are in its lee
against the wind.
"Hold hard!--Watch out!--Duck!" roars the Commander at the top of
his voice.
I shrink down still farther, tense every muscle so as to clamp
myself viselike between the bulwark and the column of the TBT. My heart
turns over. If this wave breaks--God help us! The boat will never get out
from under.
All other sounds are now lost in a single sharp, evil hissing. For
the space of a few oppressive moments I don't even breathe. Then I feel
the boat being heaved up from astern; on and on it rises, transfixed at
an angle against the crumpled ridges of the slope, higher than ever
before. The stranglehold of fear is beginning to relax its grip on me--
and then the crest breaks. A monstrous cudgel strikes the tower and makes
it ring, sending a shudder through the whole boat. I hear a shrill,
gurgling whine, and a maelstrom of water shoots swirling into the bridge.
I clamp my mouth shut and hold my breath. There's green glass in
front of my eyes. I make myself as heavy as I can so that the solid
current won't tear me off my feet. God--are we going to drown? The whole
bridge cockpit is full to overflowing.
Finally the tower tips sideways. I bob up and gulp for air, but at
once my breath is cut short. The bridge is heeling even farther. Can a Uboat capsize? What about our ballast keel? Can it withstand this sort of
fury?
The whirlpool is trying to rip the clothes from my body. I open my
mouth wide, breathe hard, and pull first my right foot and then my left
out of the vortex, as though out of a snare. Now I can venture to look
up. Our stern is vertical! Quickly I turn my head front, force my bent
knees to straighten, allow myself a quick glance over the bulwark. I
glimpse the face of the Second Watch Officer: his mouth is wide open and
he looks as if he's yelling at the top of his voice. But nothing seems to
be coming out.
Water drips from the Commander's face. The rim of his sou'wester is
streaming like a roof gutter. Stiff and unmoved, he's staring straight
ahead. I follow the direction of his eyes.
The other craft must now be on our port bow. Suddenly its whole
length is laid bare. The same wave that ran under us is lifting it
skyward. This takes no more than a moment, then its bow is buried in a
flood of foam. It looks as if they'd gone to sea with only half a boat. A
column of spray shoots straight up from their tower, like ocean rollers
colliding with a cliff. They disappear completely in the gray spindrift.
The Second Watch Officer roars something that sounds like "poor
devils!" Poor devils! Has he gone mad? Has he forgotten that we're being
shaken and thrown around in exactly the same way?
We swing around farther. The angle between our course and the
running of the sea grows steadily less. Soon we'll be able to take the
waves head on.
"Good work--oh, hell!" roars the Second Watch Officer. "If only
that bunch--over there--doesn't go and try--something fancy!"
I too am afraid that they won't be able to hold their boat on
course in this sea. Our turning circle quickly carries us closer to them.
Already the waves thrown off by their bow, which is acting like a
snowplow, are colliding with the choppy cross-current stirred up by our
own. Sheets of water shoot into the air--dozens of geysers, small, large,
gigantic . . .
Then we're on our way up again. An insane wave surging out of the
depths like some fabled leviathan has taken us on its back. We rise--a
Submarine Ascension--_Kyrie eleison!_ As if struggling to free ourselves
from the earth we soar like a black zeppelin, higher and higher. Our
foreship is right out of the water.
I might as well be on the roof of a building as I look down into
the bridge of the other boat--god! Hasn't the Old Man cut it too fine? We
could be slammed down on top of them!
But no commands come. I can now recognize each of the five men who
are bracing themselves against the starboard bulwark and staring up at
us. Thomsen is in the middle.
They're all gaping like the wooden dolls with mouths you try to pop
cloth balls into--or like a brood of nestlings waiting for their mother
to return.
So that's the way it looks! That's how the Tommies would see us if
they were around just now: a barrel with five men lashed down tight
inside--a black kernel in a patch of foam, a pit in the white flesh of a
fruit. Only when the wave subsides does the image change--and a steel
tube comes rolling out of the water.
Now the whale lets us slide sideways off his back, and we're on our
way down again. Down and down.
My god--why doesn't the Old Man do something?
I catch sight of his face. He's grinning. The maniac can grin at a
time like this.
"Heads down!"
Quick, arch your back like a cat. Hold tight, knees against the
bulwark, back against the periscope housing. Tense your muscles. Tighten
your belly. The wall, the wall of water, bottle-green and heraldically
decorated, rises before us like Hiroshige's _Great Wave off Kanagawa_.
It becomes concave, curves toward us--get your head out of the way!
Still time to gasp a lungful of air and huddle up, press the binoculars
against your belly--and the hammer strikes again. Hold your breath,
count. Fight down the choking and go on counting till the tearing flood
recedes.
I'm amazed: our terrible sideways slide didn't happen this time.
The Old Man--hardened skipper that he is--knew how the whale would
behave. He can sense what the water will do, predict the behaviors of sea
monsters.
Now it's Thomsen's turn to wobble on the crest of a mountainous
wave, pushed upward by a gigantic fist. Peering through the glasses, I
see his diving tanks come completely free, glistening brightly. The boat
hangs there for an eternity--then is suddenly slung into the next valley.
A torn white comb shoots up between us, and the others disappear as
though they had never existed. A dozen heartbeats later and I still see
nothing but gray-white boiling waves, wind-whipped mountains of snow.
They look primeval, having swallowed up the other boat.
To think that down there in the belly of the other boat, in the
midst of this wild dance, there's the watch standing by the engines, the
radioman crouching in his shack, and men braced in their bunks in the bow
compartment trying to read or sleep; lights are burning down there and
human beings are alive . . .
See here, I tell myself, you're acting like the Second Watch
Officer. You're completely forgetting that we're traveling in the same
sort of boat. Our men are putting up with the very same treatment as the
ones over there.
The Commander calls for signal flags. Signal flags? He's gone
completely nuts! How can anyone signal here?
But he grasps them like two relay runners' batons, and as we hurtle
up again toward the sky he quickly unsnaps his safety belt, braces
himself against the periscope housing, high over the bulwark, and keeping
himself firmly wedged unrolls the hand flags; with complete composure, as
though we were on an outing on the Wannsee, he sends his message: W-h-at-h-a-v-e-y-o-u-s-u-n-k.
Hard to believe: a man on the other boat actually makes the arm
signal for "Understood." And as we're being swept down again on our
conveyor belt, the other lunatic over there signals: T-e-n-t-h-o-u-s-a-nd-t-o-n-s.
Like people in the cars of two ferris wheels turning in opposite
directions, we exchange information in deaf and dumb language through the
flying spray. For seconds at a time the boats hang level with each other.
As we rise again the Old Man gives the other boat one more signal: G-o-od-l-u-c-k-y-o-u-b-a-s-t-a-r-d-s.
The other lot have now got out their flags. We read aloud in
chorus: R-e-g-a-r-d-s-b-r-o-k-e-n-m-a-s-t-s-a-n-d-s-h-r-o-u-d.s-t-o-y-ou.
Suddenly the wave lets us drop, and we are pitched downward at
racing speed. Heeling to the limit, we sink into a valley filled with
spindrift.
High above us the bow of the other boat is pushed free, way out
over the abyss; it's left hanging--both torpedo tube doors on the port
side clearly visible, as is every individual flood slit and the whole
underwater hull--until the overhanging foreship drives into the valley
like a falling ax blade. With a fury that could split steel it slices
into the wave. The water is suddenly hurled aside to left and right in
huge, glassy, green masses. The waves meet over it again, cover it with
boiling eddies, and wash over the bridge. Only a few dark flecks remain
visible in the raging foam: the heads of the bridge watch and one arm
waving a red signal flag.
I intercept a dumbfounded glance from the Second Watch Officer to
the Commander, and then I see the face of the Chief, distorted in
ecstasy; he must have been on the bridge for some time.
I hug the periscope with one arm and hoist myself higher. The other
boat remains hidden astern in the trough of the waves. Then suddenly a
barrel is there, tossed high, then sunk; after that there's only a
dancing cork, and a few minutes later nothing whatever.
The Old Man orders a resumption of course. Up with the tower hatch-
-keep your eye on a passing wave--and down through the gullet.
The helmsman in the tower squeezes Out of the way, but the boat
heels to starboard, so he gets a dash of water just the same.
"What was going on?"
"Met another boat--U-Thomsen--pretty close!"
The hatch is kicked shut from above. Pale faces emerge from the
darkness as if picked out by miners' lamps. We're underground again. I
suddenly realize that not even the helmsman saw what was going on.
I undo my sou'wester from under my chin, laboriously pull off my
rubber jacket. The control-room mate is hanging on my every word. For
better or worse I have to throw him a scrap or two-- "Hard to believe the
way tile Commander handled her--honest-- it was a model exercise!"
The excitement seems to have loosened my muscles: I get out of my
soaking clothes much faster than the day before. Next to me the Chief is
meticulously drying himself.
Ten minutes later we're assembled in the Officers' Mess.
I'm still wound up, but I try to behave casually: "Wasn't that all
rather informal?"
"What d'you mean?" the Old Man asks.
"Our meeting."
"How so?"
"Weren't we supposed to fire a recognition signal?"
"Oh god," says the Commander. "_That_ tower--you could recognize it
at first glance! They'd have had a fit if we'd shot off a rocket. It
would have meant they'd have had to answer at once, And who knows whether
they'd have had the shells ready in weather like this? Wily go around
embarrassing our friends?"
And just because recognition signals are never to be used in
doubtful cases, we get rousted out of our seats a couple of times a day
while someone fetches them!
"No grumbling, says the Old Man. "A must is a must--regulations.'
Ten minutes later he comes back to my criticism. "In weather like
this we don't have to bother about the Tommies' subs anyway. What would
they be looking for? A _German_ convoy?"
_Saturday_. The excitement is over. At lunchtime we sit tightly
braced around tile table and chew. The off-duty lookouts are gradually
sinkmg into their old lethargy.
The meal is over before the Old Man finally opens his mouth. "They
got through fast!"
"They" must mean Thomsen and his crew. The Old Man is astonished
that Thomsen turned up in our area. "After all, he only got in a short
time before we put to sea--and the damage!"
Got through fast--that means a short time in dock.
"The C-in-C's in a hurry these days!"
Shortened dock time--sketchier repairs. Can't allow the patient to
lie about in bed instead of getting back on his feet. No more
malingering.
A good quarter of an hour goes by before the Old Man talks again.
"There's something wrong about this. Even if we're supposed to be well
equipped with boats in the Atlantic, that can't mean more than a dozen. A
dozen boats between Greenland and tile Azores--and yet we're practically
tripping over each other here. Something's not quite right! Oh well--
nothing to do with me."
Nothing to do with him! Yet he racks his brains from dawn till dusk
and probably through the night as well, brooding over the obvious
dilemma: too large a field of operations--too few boats-- no supporting
aircraft.
"It's time they came up with something."
When I wake up on the third morning after our meeting in the storm,
the movement of the boat tells me that the sea's running lower.
I clamber into my oilskins as fast as I can and head for the
bridge. It's not yet fully light.
The horizon has been blown clean. Only an occasional crest breaks
on the high groundswell. The waves are running almost as high as in
recent days, but their motion is far less violent--the boat is no longer
being shaken and jarred.
The wind is steady. Once in a while it moves uneasily a few points
from its main direction, which is northwest. It blows cold.
Toward midday the wind drops almost completely. Instead of its howl
there is only a subdued hissing and rustling. The wild uproar still
echoes in my ears and the unaccustomed quiet makes me uncomfortable,
almost as if the soundtrack had stopped in a movie theater. The waves are
still high, an endless white-maned herd sweeping past the boat, solemn,
awe-inspiring.
For all their movement it's hard to realize that the waves aren't
actually advancing--that the whole surface of the ocean isn't speeding
past us. I have to summon up the image of a wheatfield waving in the wind
in order to make myself see that these enormous masses of water are as
anchored as the wheat stalks.
"Rarely seen a groundswell this size," says the navigator. "It must
stretch a good thousand miles."
We pick up a radio report from Flossmann: "Lone ship sunk with
triple salvo."
"He'll make admiral yet," says the Old Man. He sounds more
disgusted than envious. "Up there in tile Danish Strait."
The Old Man's bitterness finds relief in an outburst of rage. "They
can't keep us hacking around like this--on nothing but a hunch! The whole
thing's futile!"
For diversion I rearrange my tiny locker. Everything's a mess:
gray-black spots of mildew on all my shirts, belt turned green with mold,
all my clothes smelling of damp rot. A marvel that we ourselves haven't
decayed--gradually watched our living bodies turn putrid.
With some of us, admittedly, the process seems to have set in
already. Zorner's face is completely disfigured by crimson boils with
yellow cores. The contrast with his pasty complexion makes the
inflammation look all the more evil. Tile seamen are the worst off
because their constant contact with salt water keeps their cuts and
carbuncles from healing.
But the storm is over. Once again the bridge is a place where we
can recuperate.
Nothing breaks the circle of the horizon. A flawless line where sky
and water meet and merge into one.
I perceive the sea as a great flat disk supporting a gray glass
bell jar. Whichever way we move, the bell moves with us, so that we
always remain at the center of the disk. Its radius is only sixteen
miles, so the disk is thirty-two miles in diameter--a mere nothing
compared to the endless Atlantic.
VII CONTACT
The first message our radioman picks up today is a request for
Thomsen to report his position.
"Where is he now?" I ask the Old Man.
"He hasn't reported," the Old Man says. "And there've been two more
requests since then."
Images of disaster: boats under aircraft attack, bombs exploding
around them like gigantic incandescent cauliflowers.
I tell myself that Thomsen must have his own reasons for not
replying. Situations certainly exist in which even the briefest radio
signal can be a giveaway.
Next morning at breakfast I inquire, as casually as I can,
"Anything from Thomsen?"
"No!" says the Old Man, and goes on chewing, staring stolidly
ahead. Must be damage to the antenna, I tell myself. Or trouble with the
transmitter. Radio mast carried away, something like that.
Herrmann comes in with the daybook. The Old Man reaches for it
impatiently, reads the signals, signs, and snaps the book shut. I take it
and hand it back. The Old Man says nothing.
Recently there've been cases of boats being bombed so badly that
they couldn't even get off a distress signal.
"He should have reported long ago," says the Old Man. "Without
having to be asked."
Next day no mention of Thomsen. The subject is taboo. No
theorizing, but it's easy to see what the Old Man thinks. Before long,
Headquarters is going to be issuing another three-star report.
Around midday, just as lunch is about to be served, there's a
report from the control room. "To the Commander. Trails of smoke at one
hundred forty degrees!"
The Commander is on his feet in an instant. We rush after him into
the control room. On my way, I grab a pair of binoculars from their hook
and reach the bridge close behind the Old Man.
"Where?"
The navigator points. "There, on the port beam under the righthand
bulge of the big cumulus cloud--very faint."
No matter how hard I look, I can't make anything out in the
direction indicated. The navigator certainly wouldn't mistake a galleon
made of cloud for a smoke trail! The area in question is like a crowded
stage set, with screen after screen of cloud coming up over the horizon
in a rich display of gray and mauve.
The Commander bends his head to the binoculars. I work the horizon
again inch by inch, while it dances violently in my glasses. Nothing but
close-packed clouds, and every single one of them potentially a trail of
smoke. I strain my eyes as hard as I can. Already they're watering.
What a witch's cauldron! Finally I spot a thin pipe, a shade darker
than the mauve-colored background and flaring out toward the top like a
tuba. Close beside it the same shape repeats itself like a reflection--a
little dimmer and more blurred perhaps, but unmistakable all the same.
And there--a whole row of tiny pine trees, their thin trunks reaching
down below the horizon. The Commander lowers his glasses. "Convoy! No
doubt about it. What's our course?"
"Two hundred fifty degrees!"
The Old Man doesn't hesitate for a second. "Steer two hundred
thirty!"
"Course two hundred thirty degrees."
"Both engines half speed ahead!"
He turns to the navigator, who has kept his eyes glued to his
glasses. "Do they seem to be running on a southerly course, navigator?"
"That's my guess," says Kriechbaum, still staring through his glasses.
"Got to get ahead of them first and find out exactly where they're
headed," says the Commander and orders the helmsman "Port ten degrees!"
No excited outburst. No fever of the hunt. Expressionless faces.
Wichmann is the only one to betray excitement: He was the first to
discover the smoke clouds.
"Third watch. Told you so. Leave it to the third watch!" he mutters
to himself with self-satisfaction from under his glasses. But when he
notices out of the corner of his eye that the Commander has heard him, he
blushes and falls silent.
As yet, the tiny pine trees tell us nothing about the ships'
course. South was only an assumption. The convoy may be heading toward
the boat. Or it may just as well be going away. The ships with their
telltale plumes of smoke may be moving below the horizon in any direction
on the compass rose.
My glasses remain fixed on our target as the boat slowly turns
under me.
"Rudder neutral!"
The helmsman in the tower now brings the helm to midship position.
The boat continues to turn.
"How far has she swung?" asks the Commander.
"One hundred seventy degrees!" the answer comes from below.
"Steer one hundred sixty-five!"
The turn of the boat slackens until the tiny pines stand precisely
over our how. Squinting suspiciously, the Commander inspects the skies
with their heavy cover of gray clouds. He tilts his head back and pivots
almost a full circle on his axis. Please god, no planes!
A report from below: "Lunch on the table!"
"No time! Bring it up," the Commander orders gruffly.
The plates are put on small fold-down seats attached to the bridge
bulwark. The food just sits there. No one touches it.
The Commander asks the navigator what time tile moon sets. So he's
going to wait until nightfall before attacking. For tile time being
there's nothing for us to do but stay alert and keep contact-- come hell
or high water--so that other U-boats can be brought up.
The smoke clouds gradually push their way higher above the horizon
and move slightly to starboard.
"I think they're shifting to the right!" says the navigator.
"A returning convoy," the Commander agrees. "Probably sailing in
ballast. Too bad, really. One headed east would have been better."
"Twelve mastheads visible already," Wichmann reports.
"That'll do for the time being," the Commander retorts and shouts
below, "Helmsman, what's our course?"
"One hundred sixty-five degrees!"
The Commander starts muttering calculations. "Convoy bearing twenty
degrees to starboard--so its true course is one hundred eighty-five
degrees. Distance? Probably average-sized steamers-- means about sixteen
miles."
Our wake bubbles like lemon soda. Little white clouds like bursts
of shrapnel are blowing aimlessly across the sky. The boat charges ahead
through tile gray sea, wet-muzzled, slavering.
"Probably close enough now--won't slip through our fingers!" says
the Commander. And immediately qualifies his statement. "Provided nothing
gets in the way." And to the helmsman: "Hard a-starboard! Course two
hundred fifty-five degrees!"
Slowly the smoke clouds swing over until they're on our port beam.
Tile boat is now running on a course we assume is parallel to the convoy.
The Commander lowers his glasses for no more than seconds at a
time. Now and again he murmurs something. I hear snatches. "Never get it
. . . just the way . . . you want it . . . They're going the wrong way."
So: a fully laden convoy headed for England would be better. Not
just because the cargo would be lost, but also because chasing an
eastbound convoy would bring us closer to home. The enormous consumption
of fuel at high speed is worrying the Old Man. If the pursuit were to
bring us nearer to home base, our situation would look a lot better.
"Fuel?" I hear tile navigator say. Ordinarily he avoids the word
like an obscenity. The Commander resembles a police detective as he
confers with him in whispers. Finally tile Chief is summoned. He's
looking bleak.
"Have everything double-checked," the Old Man orders, and the Chief
nimbly disappears below.
It must be a good half hour until the Commander orders both engines
run at full speed. He wants to be far enough ahead of the convoy before
twilight.
The booming of the engines soars until the repeated firing of the
individual cylinders blends into a single rumbling roar. Spray shoots out
of the slits in the grating and comes flying at us like shaving lather.
The bow w'ave is suddenly huge.
The Chief promptly reappears. Worried about fuel.
"Supplies are pretty low, Herr Kaleun!" is his sepulchral warning.
"We can't keep this up for more than three hours at most!"
"How much d'vou reckon we'll need if we really crawl home?" the
Commander asks casually. The Chief leans over and cups his hands around
his mouth, like a man lighting a cigarette in the wind, so I can't hear
his answer. In any case, he has his figures all ready.
About a thumb's breadth above the horizon the ragged, brownish
balls of smoke gradually coalesce into an oily, ochre-brown bank of mist.
The mastheads beneath look like slowly-sprouting beard stubble.
The Old Man puts his binoculars down, pushes the leather shield
over the lenses, and turns to the First Watch Officer, who at some point
has taken over. "Under no circumstances allow those mastheads to rise any
higher than they are now!" Then he disappears through the tower hatch.
Not quite as agilely as the Chief, I see. I climb down behind him.
Down in the control room, the navigator has copied all our
maneuvers onto a large sheet of graph paper. He's just entering a new
bearing for the enemy and correcting the distance.
"Give it here!" the Commander interrupts. "So that's where he is
right now! Looks all right." And, turning to me, "His exact course will
gradually become clear from the graphs in the next few hours." But
there's an urgent undertone in his voice as he says to the navigator,
"Unfold the big chart so we can see where he's coming from." Bending over
it, he carries on a kind of monologue. "Coming from the North Channel!
What's his over-all course likely to be? Well, we'll soon have that He
lays his protractor between the position of the convoy and the North
Channel and reads off the angle. "Two hundred fifty degrees, more or
less!" He thinks for a moment. "But they can't have steered that course
straight through. They have to have made a long detour north to outflank
suspected U-boat patrols. Didn't do them much good . . . that's the way
it goes!"
The droning roar of the two diesels fills every crevice of the
boat. It works on us like a tonic: we hold our heads higher again--our
bodies are suddenly more supple. My pulse seems to beat faster.
The Old Man has changed most conspicuously of all. He looks
relaxed, almost cheerful, and now and again the corners of his mouth curl 
in a smile. The engines are running flat out and already the world looks
rosy--as if all we'd been longing for was to hear the muffled roaring
throb of the diesels again. For a while no one speaks. Then the Commander
says, "In any case, we can't open up before dark. They may have some
surprises up their sleeve."
Before dark--it's hours till then.
I can only stand being in my bunk for a quarter of an hour. I get
up to see how things are going in the engine room, astern. The after
hatch won't open. I have to use the whole weight of my body to overcome
the suction of the racing engines. The noise is like a box on the ears.
Mouth and eyes open wide. The pushrods on the sides of the diesels are
visible only as a waving blur. The needles on the dials of the manometers
jerk feverishly back and forth. Oil fumes fill the room like thick fog.
Johann is on duty. Frenssen's there too. He gives a broad grin when
he sees me--that usual look of weariness is gone. His eyes are proud.
Everything in order. Now we'll see what his two diesels are capable of!
Johann is rubbing black oil from his hands with colored cotton
waste. It's a wonder he hasn't gone deaf in here. But this infernal roar
is probably like the rustling of trees in a forest to him. He brings his
mouth close to my ear and bellows, "What's up?"
I roar back right in his ear. "Pro--ceeding against--a--convoy.
Waiting--till--dark!" The chief mechanic blinks twice, nods, and turns
back to his manometers. It takes me several seconds to realize that the
men here in the stern don't even know _why_ we're running at full speed.
The bridge is far away. When you're standing here on the iron grids, the
world beyond the hatch ceases to exist. The engine telegraph, the signal
lights, the public-address system are the only connections with the
outside. If the Old Man doesn't see fit to announce over the loudspeaker
why we're changing speed, no one here knows what's going on.
Once again, as always happens when I set foot in the engine room,
the uniform rumble of the explosions takes possession of me completely.
I'm stunned, and immediately assailed by lurid visions. Obsessive,
tormenting images: the engine rooms of great ships--targets for our
torpedoes! Huge halls with high- and low-pressure turbines, heavily
insulated pipelines under great pressure, highly vulnerable boilers,
driving shafts, and the many auxiliary engines. No partitions. If they
take a hit, they fill quicker than any other compartment of the ship, and
with a flooded engine room, no ship can be kept afloat.
A series of pictures rushes through my mind. A hit amidships
triggers the chain reaction: the boilers explode, releasing high-pressure
steam, and pipelines are torn apart; the ship immediately loses power;
the silvery gleaming iron stairs, so narrow there's only room for one man
at a time--but everyone is fighting at once, trying to find a way up them
in the dark, through the searing steam, toward the deck.
What a job! Working in the engine room ten feet below the water
line, knowing that at any second a torpedo may tear open the ship's side
without the slightest warning! How often while on convoy the men must
measure the thin plates that divide them from the sea. How often they
must surreptitiously try out the quickest route to the deck, always with
the taste of panic in their mouths, and in their ears the rending scream
of iron, the blast of the explosion, and the roaring inrush of the sea.
Not one second's feeling of security. Always scared shitless, always 
waiting for the clanging of the alarm bell. A hell of fear--three, four
weeks at a stretch.
On the tankers it's even worse. A torpedo amidships and the boat
rapidly becomes a single flaming inferno. Every square foot white hot
from bow to stern. If the compressed gases explode, the ship blows up in
a belch of fire and smoke--a gigantic torch.
Something flickers in Johann's face, jerking me out of my
nightmares. His expression of watchful concentration remains for a
moment, then dissolves: everything in order. The door to the motor room
is standing open. Oil-heavy, hothouse warmth fills the compartment. The
motor is turning over without charging. A quick beat indicates that the
air-compressors are working. Rademacher is engaged at the moment in
feeling the temperature of the shaft bearings. Zörner the E-stoker is
sitting on a pile of oilskins, reading. He's too immersed to notice me
looking over his shoulder:
_The Junker was holding the woman in his arms, bending her backward
so that the light fell on her face in its circle of black curls; he
encountered a look of fierce challenge, such as he felt on his own face
burning down on her, as though each of them was seeking assurance that
her surrender would sweep them ever more fiercely to the very end, to a
roaring destruction, a return to that darkness from which they had
emerged into the singing, gold2n hail of a life menaced on all sides, and
the terrible futility of their fleeting moments together. The Junker's
features were frozen in a threatening and paralyzing mask of overweaning
power, then they slowly and painfully relaxed and he stammered into the
roaring stillness, as if his tongue were reluctant to obey him, that he
wished to kill her_ . . .
The bridge is a long way off. I have to feel my way back into
reality along an Ariadne's thread. As I let the hatch slam against its
frame, the noise of the diesels is cut short as at the stroke of a knife,
but in my skull the dull roar continues. I shake my head, but some
minutes go by before I can silence the dull thrumming in both ears.
"They must have a pretty complicated tacking system," the Old Man
says to me when I'm on the bridge again.
"Astonishing how they manage it. They don't just run their general
course with a touch of routine tacking thrown in. Nothing so simple. They
build all sorts of deviations into the system to stop us getting the hang
of it too quickly. It's driving the navigator crazy. Right now he's
working nonstop, poor bastard: presumed enemy course, our course,
collision course. It can't be easy, keeping a circus like that going!" It
takes me a few seconds to realize that this last sentence no longer
refers to our navigator but to the English convoy commander. "It used to
be that they only altered course in regular tacks; never took us long to
see what their over-all intention was. But recently they've learned to
make life tough for us, the bastards. Well, we all do the best we can.
Must be a fascinating job, convoy commander. Keeping a herd of sheep like
that together straight across the Atlantic, always on the alert . . ."
Now _we_ have become the contact boat. We must see to it that we're
neither driven off nor forced to submerge. We have to be as persistent as
our ship's fly. If you strike at her and miss, she immediately sits down
again in exactly the same place. The fly--the symbol of persistence, and
so a genuine heraldic animal. Why don't any of us have one in our conning 
tower? Commanders have had wild boars and snorting bulls painted on, but
no one has yet hit upon the fly.
Ought to propose it to the Old Man sometime: a big fly on the
tower! Only not right now. Hands jammed deep in his trouser pockets, he's
doing his lumbering dance around the open hatch. A bridge lookout
ventures a bewildered glance. Immediately the Old Man snaps at him.
"What're you doing with your eyes, sailor?"
I've never seen him like this before. He keeps slamming the tower
bulwark with his fist, a regular drumroll, until the bridge resounds with
it. Then he roars, "Navigator, have to have the radio message ready. I'll
take another quick bearing so we can give them an accurate general course
report."
The direction finder is brought onto the bridge. The Commander
places it on the bridge compass, takes a bearing on the smoke trails, and
reads off the degrees. Then he calls down, "Navigator: True bearing one
hundred fifty-five degrees--distance fourteen miles!"
After a while the navigator reports, "Convoy course two hundred
forty degrees!"
"Well, just as we suspected," the Commander says to himself and
nods at me, then calls below: "Can you make any estimate of speed?"
The navigator's face appears in the hatch. "Between seven point
five and eight point five knots, Herr Kaleun!"
Hardly a minute passes before a slip with the radio message is
handed up. "Convoy in Square AX three hundred fifty-six, course two
hundred forty degrees--speed about eight knots--UA." The Old Man signs
the radio message with a stump of a pencil and hands it down again.
The Chief comes on deck, looking worried, and peers up at the
Commander like a kicked dog.
"Here you are again!" The Commander's trying to head him off.
"Whoever wants to play has to pay! Or are there any serious problems?"
"Not on account of the diesels, Herr Kaleun! Only the voyage home."
"Ach, Chief, stop your Doomsday nonsense! Praise the Lord and keep
your powder dry. Or don't you believe in the Lord God, Father of Heaven
and Earth? She's running pretty, isn't she?"
Once the Chief has disappeared, however, the Commander does start
doing some calculations with the navigator. "When will it be dark?"
"At 19.00."
"So we won't have to run full speed very much longer. At least
we've got enough for the first attack! After that we'll have to draw on
the secret reserves that Their Highnesses the Chiefs like to keep
squirreled away."
The smoke clouds now look like captive balloons on short strings,
stretched out along the horizon. I count fifteen.
With forced indifference the Commander says, "We'd better give some
thought to their protective screen. Edge up a bit closer. It could be
very useful tonight to know what kind of escorts we have to reckon with."
The First Watch Officer immediately shifts course two points to
port. Number One, who has charge of the forward starboard section,
mutters audibly, "This time we're about due for something . .
The Commander really cuts him short. "Careful, gentlemen! Anything
can happen between now and dusk!"
Taking the dim view. But I'm convinced that down deep the Old Man
is absolutely confident. The old superstition: don't jinx the attack.
The C-in-C's radiograms reveal that five boats in all have already
been turned loose on the convoy. Five--that's a real pack. One of them,
as we discover from his position report, arrived during the night. It's
Flechsig--and he's to the west of us.
The First Watch Officer is sitting in the Officers' Mess, and it's
clear that he's nervous. I see him moving his lips noiselessly. Probably
memorizing his "prayer before battle," the words of command for firing
the torpedoes. Since no enemy came within torpedo range on his last
patrol, this is his first attack. In any event, we're safe from his
typewriter for the time being.
I bump into the Chief in the control room. He may be looking quite
self-possessed, but he's on hot bricks. I watch him silently but with a
meaningful grin until he inquires furiously what I find so interesting.
"Come, come," says the Old Man, suddenly bobbing up out of nowhere.
"Let's hope the gas exhaust pipes hold up," says the Chief.
"There's damage in the one from the port diesel."
It's only a few hours since Johann was telling me a story. "We were
keeping contact once on UZ, when the diesel exhaust pipes broke. God,
what a shambles! All the exhaust gas was venting into the diesel
compartment. Couldn't see your hand in front of your face. Had to get the
hell out of there and come back with escape gear. Two of the stokers
keeled over on us. Had to be relieved. The Old Man himself came down.
Question was: Give up and let the scows go or put up with the gas until
we attacked? It was touch and go-- for three whole hours! The walls were
completely black and we looked like niggers."
The Chief gets restless. He disappears aft without a word. Five
minutes later he's back again.
"Well, how does it look?"
"_Comme ci, comme ça_," is his sibylline reply.
The Commander is busy at the chart table and seems to be paying no
attention.
The radioman comes in with the daybook to be signed. Which means
two more hours have gone by.
"Our newspaper," says the Old Man. "A message for Merkel, nothing
special, simply an order to report his position. He sailed the same day
we did."
The fact that old Merkel, alias Catastrophe Merkel, is still alive
amazes us all. His First Watch Officer had told me what he got away with
during his last patrol when he met a tanker in an unusually heavy sea.
"The tanker had bad luck. She altered course and ran straight in front of
our sights. The sea was running so high that we couldn't get her in our
periscope. We had to close right in so that the tanker couldn't take
evasive action after we fired our torpedoes. Merkel ordered a single
shot, tube three. We heard the detonation as it hit, immediately followed
by another one. The Chief did all he could to keep us at periscope depth,
but we still couldn't get a glimpse of the tanker. It was minutes before
the periscope came clear and when it did--there was the side of tanker
looming over us. They'd circled. Too late to get away. They rammed us
when we were only fifty feet down. Both periscopes in the ashcan, but the
pressure hull held--amazing! It really was a matter of inches. We
couldn't surface: our tower hatch was completely jammed shut from the 
impact of the collision. Not very pleasant if you can't look around, let
alone get out. Disagreeable feeling. Eventually we made it through the
galley hatch and opened the tower hatch from outside with a hammer and
chisel. But we were in no shape for emergency dives . . ."
At the time no one dared ask Merkel how he had managed to make his
way back two thousand miles to base with his tower smashed up and his
periscope gone. But Merkel's hair was gray before that anyway.
While I'm trying to get my cameras ready in the petty officers'
compartment, I run into a noisy conversation among the inhabitants.
Despite the closeness of the convoy, they're back on subject number one.
"You really should've seen his last lady friend. Born in 1870.
First you had to sweep the cobwebs out of the way . .
Zeitler emits a deafening belch that comes from the pit of his
stomach.
"Long-distance record!" says Pilgrim applaudingly.
I take refuge in the bow compartment. The off-duty lookouts, five
or six of them, are sitting under the swaying hammocks on the floor
plates, some cross-legged, some sprawled out. All they need is a small
campfire.
I'm besieged. "Well, how does it look?"
"Everything seems to be going according to schedule."
The Gigolo is stirring his teacup with a greasy knife.
"Godawful bouillon," Ario grins, "but nourishing."
The bridge johnny comes in and pretends amazement. "What kind of a
campsite is this supposed to be?"
Then he tries to find a place in the circle, and Ario promptly
loses his temper. "Don't be so cooi about walking off with my bread and
butter! You did the same thing yesterday. Next time I'm going to bash
your head in!"
The bridge johnny helps himself to another slice of bread, settles
himself comfortably, and addresses the company at large. "Let me tell you
a little secret--you're all simple-minded swine."
Nobody takes this amiss.
Tension keeps me on the move. Back in the petty officers' quarters
I hardly need to listen to know what they're talking about. Zeitler has
the floor. "We had the same sort of a pig on board when I was with the
minesweepers."
"If by any chance the pig you're talking about is me, you're about
due for accident compensation!" Frenssen announces. "And fast."
"Bulishit, you heinie! Who's talking about you?"
"If the shoe fits Pilgrim pipes up.
I take a look around the room. Rademacher has pulled his curtain
shut. Zeitler seems to be acting offended; apparently he's imitating
Frenssen, waiting to be spoken to.
The door to the galley opens. The one beyond, leading to the engine
room, is also open. The noise from the diesels drowns all conversation.
"Ten minutes till time!" I hear a voice call. Confusion, complaints,
curses: getting ready to change the engine-room watch. It must be i8.oo
now.
Back on to the bridge. Twilight soon. Dark clouds have come up
under gray skies.
The sucking roar of the intake nozzles for the superchargers on
both sides of the bridge silences the diesels.
"I wouldn't care to be their convoy commander when our pack hits,"
the Old Man says in a loud voice from under his binoculars. "They're
going at a crawl! After all, they can't move any faster then the slowest
steamer. And no chance to maneuver. Some of the captains are bound to be
real dummies--and trying to follow a fixed tacking system with a mob like
that--oh my god! They're all used to steering straight ahead, and to hell
with the regulations for avoiding collisions at sea . . ."
After a while he begins again. "Anyone who ships on one of those
gasoline tankers must be either superhuman--or subnormal. Spending weeks
on end crawling along with a shipful of gasoline, just waiting for the
torpedoes to hit! No thank you!"
For a good while he stares silently through his glasses. "They're
tough fellows," he growls eventually. "I heard about one man who'd been
fished out of the drink for the fourth time by the crew of a destroyer.
He'd been sunk three times, rescued three times, and he shipped out again
for the fourth--that's really something. Of course, they get lots of
cash--love of country plus a fat paycheck-- maybe that's the best mix of
soil for breeding heroes." Then he adds dryly, "Sometimes the booze is
enough."
The loop antenna has been up for some time. We're now sending
directional signals for the other boats in the area. The flag pushers at
Command Headquarters in Kernével are also getting short signals sent out
at hourly intervals, prearranged combinations of letters from which they
can deduce all they need to know about the convoy: position, course,
speed, number of ships, escort system, our own fuel situation, and even
the weather. Our changes in course allow them to form a picture of the
convoy's movement too. We are forbidden to attack until more boats have
been brought up.
The mood in the boat has changed. It's remarkably quiet in the
compartments. The excitement seems to have subsided. Most of the men are
lying down, trying to get some sleep during these last few hours before
we attack.
In the control room all systems have long since been made ready,
the connections tested again and again. Now there's nothing further for
the control-room mates to do. One of them is working on a crossword
puzzle and asks me whether I know a city in France that begins with Ly--"
"Lyon."
"Thanks. Perfect."
The Chief appears from aft. "Well, how do things look?" he asks.
"Good, as far as I can tell."
The Chief seems to have no pressing problems aside from his concern
about fuel. He has weasled his way around the boat to his own
satisfaction, so he sits down on the chart chest to chat for a bit.
"Looks as if all that calculating's paid off: I'd stopped believing in
it. Dear god, the shitty times we have to put up with nowadays! Used to
be _veni, vidi, vici_: In the old days you could take a position right on
course and sit there until someone came along. Now Their Highnesses make
themselves scarce--quite right, of course, from their point of view."
19.00. The optical system for the night direction-finder lies ready
in the control room with three men bustling around it: The torpedo-firing
mechanism is being inspected.
I'm vaguely aware of someone saying, "A whole string of tubs-- we
_have_ to get some of them!"
Up on the bridge again. Now it's 19.30 hours. All the officers are
assembled except for the apprentice engineer. The Chief is sitting on the
TBT column like a hunter in his tree blind. Our course is i8o degrees.
Behind the trails of smoke the sky has separated into blood-red
horizontal stripes. It looks like a huge marquee. The sun has sunk away
behind the clouds. The red fades slowly into a pale silky green. A few
clouds with tattered edges drift close to the horizon, still tinged with
the afterglow. Moving slowly, bathed and flecked with rose, they look
like some exotic species of fantailed goldfish. Their scales catch the
light, sparkle and gleam, then fade again. Dark patches suddenly appear
on them like fingerprints.
Night is now rising in the east. Stretch after stretch of the sky
is overrun by the darkness we have been awaiting so eagerly.
"Navigator, write down: 19.30 hours--twilight--horizon somewhat
closer--convoy formation clearly discernible in four columns-- intend to
attack by night.' That way we have something ready for the war log."
The Old Man gives an order to the engine room. The roar of the
diesels immediately fades and falters. Back to the sound of that
interminable frigging around. The white mane of our wake collapses and
turns into a bright green trail behind us.
Now we're far enough ahead of the convoy. The idea is that despite
the rapidly decreasing visibility we should have time to register their
every change of course and adjust our own accordingly so as to keep the
superstructures of the steamers low on the horizon.
The sky is already hung with the chalky-white disk of the moon,
which gradually begins to glow.
"May take a while yet," the Old Man says to me. He's hardly
finished speaking when the stern starboard lookout reports, "Masthead
astern!" Our glasses all swing in the same direction. I find nothing.
"Goddammit!" the Old Man mutters.
I glance sideways to see where his glasses are pointing. Then I aim
my binoculars at the horizon and move them slowly along it to the left,
trying to find his angle. The horizon is barely distinguishable from the
evening sky. I keep searching--there! A real mast! Hair-thin! No plume of
smoke--has to be an escort vessel. Corvette? Destroyer? A sweeper making
its big evening swing to clear the neighborhood before nightfall?
Have they spotted us already? They always have their best men in
the crow's nest!
Anyway, they have us straight in front of them in the west, where
it's nowhere near dark enough yet. We're silhouetted much too clearly
against the horizon.
Why doesn't the Old Man take action? He's crouching like a
harpooner waiting behind his cannon for the whale to blow again. Without
putting down his glasses he orders "Both engines full ahead!"
No hydroplane orders. No order to dive.
The blowers roar. The boat leaps forward. My god, this seething
white wake is bound to betray us to the Tommies! Our hull of course is
camouflaged gray, but the white trail and the blue cloud of exhaust gas
over it. . . The diesels are now pouring out as many fumes as a defective 
tractor. Blotted out by this thick banner of gas, the horizon disappears
completely astern, together with the needle-thin mast. I can't see
whether it's growing taller or shrinking.
If we can't see him, I think, perhaps he can't see us either.
The noise of the diesels is infernal. They're really eating into
the Chief's fuel supply.
The Chief, I notice, has disappeared from the bridge. The Old Man
keeps his glasses pointed astern. We haven't varied from our course by so
much as one degree. The navigator is staring off along with him.
After a while the Old Man orders both diesels siow speed ahead. The
wake dwindles. Gradually the blue haze lifts. Intently the Old Man and
the navigator search the horizon. I do the same, inch by inch. Nothing.
"Hm," says the Old Man. The navigator is silent. He's got his
binoculars balanced between outstretched thumbs and middle fingers.
Finally he says, "Nothing, Herr Kaleun!"
"Have you a record of when she came in sight?"
"_Jawohl_, Herr Kaleun, 19.52 hours!"
The Old Man steps over to the hatch and calls down, "For the
record: '19.52 hours. Escort vessel in sight.' Have you got that?
'Evasive action using maximum speed on surface--escort fails to spot us
through cover of our exhaust gas'--have you got that?--'Through cover of
our exhaust gas."
So that was it. The Old Man was using the fumes deliberately.
My heart is pounding.
"Exciting, isn't it?" he says. Then there's a new shock. In the
west a rocket bursts high above the horizon; it hangs there for a while,
then describes a curve like the crook of a cane as it falls and is
extinguished.
The Commander is the first to set down his glasses. "What's that
all about?"
"They're changing course!" says the navigator.
"Maybe--and maybe they're calling up destroyers," the Commander
growls. "We don't want them peering down our necks right now. Eyes
peeled, gentlemen, no daydreaming." And after a while, "A rocket--they
must be out of their minds!"
The navigator calls down? "For the record: 'Light rocket over
convoy at ten degrees'--add the time!"
"Funny!" mutters the Old Man again. Then he turns his face to the
moon. "Let's hope we get rid of that bastard before long!" I'm standing
close to him, following the direction of his glance. The moon shows a
man's face: fat, round, baldheaded. "Just like a contented old customer
in a whorehouse," remarks the Second Watch Officer.
"Two men contemplating the moon," I murmur to myself.
"How's that?"
"Oh--nothing. The title of a picture by Friedrich,"
"What Friedrich's that?"
"Caspar David Friedrich--German romantic painter."
"I get it! A nature-lover . . ."
"Mastheads higher!" reports the navigator.
The convoy must have tacked toward us.
"Veer away again!"
The new rudder setting is reported from below. "Bearing two hundred
degrees!"
The moon adorns itself with a wide rainbow halo.
"Let's hope they leave us alone," the Commander mutters testily.
Aloud, he inquires about fuel consumption.
The Chief appears so quickly he must have been lying in wait. He
reports, "We checked everything out at i8.oo, Herr Kaleun. Up to now,
given the high rate of speed, we've used about fourteen hundred gallons.
We've practically no reserves left!"
"Number One still has a supply of cooking oil," jeers the Old Man.
"And if there's nothing else to do, we'll just have to sail home."
I sit down on a spray-damp ledge beside the platform for the antiaircraft gun. White foam streaks past beneath me in constantly changing
patterns. The moon's reflection in the wake is shattered. The myriad tiny
splinters are shaken together into a kaleidoscope of new formations. The
sea is transparent, illuminated from within by tiny greenish dots. The
shape of the boat's hull shows clearly against the glimmer: plankton. The
iron bars of the railing throw stark shadows along the gratings, cutting
across the lines of black between the individual bars to form a sharply
defined pattern of diamonds. The pattern moves. The shadows of the
railing fall across my boots: the boat must be turning in the direction
of the convoy.
All at once thin clusters of rays, fan-shaped and pale-green, shoot
across the sky.
"Northern lights!--On top of everything else!" from the Commander.
A curtain of glittering glass rods like the ones that hung from our
lamp at home is now suspended across the sky. Brilliant greenish-white
light sweeps through the glass curtain in waves. Gleaming lances shoot up
in bursts from beyond the horizon, die, blaze up again, dim a little,
grow longer as they brighten. The water around the boat sparkles as if
studded with fireflies. Our wake becomes a glittering train.
"Quite a fireworks display," says the Commander. "Pretty, but not
what we wanted."
From the brief exchanges between Commander and navigator I gather
that they're debating whether or not to have us charge into the midst of
the convoy from a forward position. The navigator swings his head
thoughtfully from right to left and back again. The Old Man seems equally
uncertain.
"Better not!" he says finally, and turns toward the moon. It's an
almost circular hole punched in the inky cloth of the sky, a splendid
blaze of white that falls like gaslight, chalky but extraordinarily
luminous. A few clouds drift across the horizon like gray lumps of ice.
As soon as they cross the path of the moon they light up; in places they
sparkle as if covered with sapphires.
Under the moon the sea becomes a huge plane of crumpled silver
paper, gleaming and sparkling, mirroring the lunar radiance a thousand
times over. It's as if the sea had jelled into immobility in the
moonlight. No waves--only this frozen brilliance. I'm suddenly reminded
of the scene in the Bar Royal on the night of our departure--Thomsen.
Don't think about that now.
Despite the moonlight the Old Man tries to edge a little closer to
the convoy, trusting to our dark background and probably also relying on
the lack of watchfulness among the sailors in the convoy.
Of course we show very little above the water, and we haven't much
of a bow wave at this speed. If only we could present our narrow
silhouette, bow or stern, to the enemy, we would be almost invisible. 
This, however, is impossible right now: we have to pursue a course
parallel to--and slightly in advance of--the convoy's.
Why doesn't a convoy this size have more of an outlying escort? I
ask myself. Was that one ship all the Tommies were able to provide by way
of protection for their flanks? Or are we already between the outer ring
and the convoy itself?
The Old Man will know what to do. This isn't his first convoy. He
has a thorough knowledge of enemy tactics. Once he even used his
periscope to observe a depth bomb pursuit aimed at himself. The commander
of the destroyer had presumed that the boat was lying deep in an
estimated position that the Old Man had long since abandoned. The Old Man
had all motors stopped, suspended the boat from the periscope, and
watched the destroyer making its runs and laying down a whole carpet of
depth charges. He's even said to have played at being a sports
commentator, giving a running commentary on the proceedings so that the
men could share in the fun.
Right now he's silent. "Four columns," is all he says in the course
of the next fifteen minutes.
Our high-speed escape from the picket boat has apparently brought
us too far ahead of the convoy, which explains why we've been running at
slow speed for some time. Headquarters will no doubt have summoned a
number of other boats that haven't yet arrived. For the time being, our
job is to keep signaling the course of the convoy.
"Perhaps we might close in a little more?"
The Commander's question is addressed to Kriechbaum.
"Mm!" is all the navigator says, and keeps his binoculars fixed on
the convoy. The Old Man takes this as sufficient assent. He gives the
helmsman an order that brings our bow diagonally across the course of the
convoy.
Once more we stand stiff and silent, Excited? God forbid! Like
landlubbers, runs through my mind. Lubbers? What are lubbers? But at once
administer my own rebuke: The hell with it, better concentrate on keeping
a proper lookout!
"Man battle stations!" The Old Man's voice sounds rusty. He has to
cough to free his vocal cords. From below, one loud roar after another.
"Chief Engineer: Engine room on battle stations!" The Chief to the
bridge, "Below deck on battle stations!" But that's not the end of it.
"First Watch Officer: Torpedo crew on battle stations!" And now the
unmistakable high voice of the First Watch Officer: "Torpedo crew on
battle stations!"
The direction finder is handed up. The First Watch Office places it
carefully on its column as if it were a raw egg.
As seen from the convoy, we are right in the path of the noon. I
can't understand why the Old Man stays on this side and nc t in the
shadow. Probably he's thinking the way they would: Sea as bright as
silver paper in the moonlight, more brilliant than full nonday sun, so
why should any German submarines be plowing around here?
Clearly the Old Man is counting on the enemy's defenses being
weaker on the moonlit side. And he's probably right, for if there weren't
any holes in the defense on this side, we would have been discovered long
ago.
I can picture the deployment of the ships and the escort vessels as
clearly as in an aerial reconnaissance photograph: four columns in an
extended rectangle; in the middle the most valuable ships, the tankers; 
two corvettes--the sweepers--as advance guards, racing in wide circles
directly in front of the convoy, in order to prevent any U-boats from
swinging back among the steamers from an advanced position. Guarding the
flanks, destroyers or corvettes speeding up and down--in the lee of the
moon, of course. Then, at a great distance from the herd, the rearguard
defense, the killers: escort ships that are not specifically defending
the convoy, because U-boats could hardly attack from a position astern.
They are there to take on any U-boats that have been spotted by the
convoy corvettes, work them over while the convoy moves on.
20.00. It occurs to me that I should have a second night film
ready. In my hasty descent I make a mess of things. I've hardly arrived
in the control room when a confusion of cries reaches me from above.
Abandoning my film I hastily climb up again. "Vessel approaching." The
Commander. "There--coming from outside-- you can see her edging up!"
I stop breathing. Ahead, four points to port, I catch sight of the
mastheads of the steamers. But the Old Man is facing aft. I search in
that direction. There it is: a narrow shadow pointing over the horizon.
What do we do now? Dive? Make a getaway? Give up? Say the hell with
it?
"Both engines full ahead!" The Commander's voice is a monotone.
Will he try the old trick again and just keep on going?
"One point to port!"
So that's not it.
A minute passes, then the Old Man makes his intentions clear.
"Closing in on the convoy!"
As I direct my glasses toward the steamers again, the navigator
announces "Mastheads getting bigger!" in a voice less than matter of
fact.
We must either dive to escape the approaching destroyer or run much
too close to the convoy.
Our wake whips back and forth like a huge tail. Over it spread the
diesel fumes, screening us in mist; with luck it'll work this time too.
In any case, I can no longer see the shadow of the destroyer through the
veil of gas.
I swing the glasses back. The convoy is now directly in front of
our bow.
"Dammit to hell!" from the Commander.
"Destroyer appears to be fallIng back," reports the navigator. Long
minutes of tense uncertainty before he breaks the spell: "Distance
increasing!"
The Commander hasn't given another glance to the destroyer. All his
attention is focused on the hummocks on the horizon--directly over our
bow.
"What's our course?"
"Bearing fifty degrees!"
"Fifteen points to starboard, steer one hundred forty degrees."
I'm still paralyzed with fear.
The Commander says, "They're running in rather loose formation
Only then does he come back to the destroyer. "Good thing we didn't dive.
Close thing this time."
Abruptly he asks the navigator, "Kriechbaum, what sort of feeling
d'you have?"
The navigator leaves his elbow propped in position, simply turns
his head from behind the binoculars, and says, "It's a sure thing, Herr
Kaleun! Absolutely. Has to work!"
"Perfectly straightforward."
Funny sort of conversation, I think. Are they reassuring each
other?
I sneak a look into the tower. Covers have been removed from the
target-position calculator, the deflection calculator, and the torpedofiring mechanism. Bluish light gleams from the dials.
"Time!" the Commander asks below.
20.10 hours!"
Unbelievable that we should be allowed to travel unchallenged
beside the convoy as though we actually belong to it.
"I don't like the look of that shadow," the Commander murmurs to
the navigator.
I turn in the same direction and pick up the thing in my glasses.
Its angle to us is very sharp. Approaching or receding--we can't tell.
Thirty degrees or one hundred fifty! It's certainly no steamer! But the
Old Man is already turning away again.
The First Watch Officer is fumbling nervously with the direction
finder. He peers through the telescopic sight, then straightens up again
momentarily and takes his bearing direct, over the bulwark in the
direction of the convoy. The Old Man, sensing his restlessness, asks in a
derisive undertone, "Visibility suit you, First Watch Officer?"
Again and again the Old Man turns his face to the moon. Then he
gives voice to his annoyance. "Wish we could use the thing for target
practice . . ."
I place my hopes in the clouds, which are lying in deep piles on
the horizon and gradually rising--so slowly, admittedly, that it may take
a good while before they reach the moon.
"They're tacking to starboard!" says the Old Man, and is seconded
by the navigator: "Just what I was thinking."
The shadows have indeed grown flatter.
The Old Man orders a ten-point turn to starboard.
"They're not going to try some new trick?"
I'm standing so close to the TBT that I can hear the First Watch
Officer every time he breathes out. I'm uneasy: the paler shadow is no
longer to be seen.
"Time?"
"20.28 hours!"
VIII SECOND ATTACK
The moon has turned even whiter, icier. All around its sharply
defined halo the sky is clear. But one of the clouds on the horizon is
advancing on it, looking like the vanguard of a whole horde.
I only have eyes for this particular one. It's moving in the right
direction, but after a while it slows down until it's hardly rising at
all; then it turns threadbare and starts to unravel. As we watch, it
dissolves. All that's left is a veil of vapor.
"For chrissake!" hisses the navigator.
But then another cloud prepares to free itself from the horizon,
even heavier and fuller than the first.
The wind pushes it a little sideways, exactly the way we want it to
go. No one is cursing any longer, as if cursing might upset it.
I abandon the cloud to concentrate on the horizon. In my glasses I
can make out the bow, stern, and midship superstructures of the
freighters.
The Commander tells the First Watch Officer his plan. "Charge them
and fire. After firing, turn instantly to port. If that cloud keeps
rising, I'll go in for the main attack!"
The First Watch Officer gives the instructions for the calculator,
which is operated by one man in the tower and a second in the control
room.
"Tubes one to four stand by for surface firing!"
All four torpedo tubes are flooded.
The bow compartment reports over the speaking tube: "Tubes one to
four clear for surface firing!"
"Connect TBT and target position calculator. Firing will take place
from bridge!" orders the First Watch Officer.
The words come smoothly. So he can do it. He's got that much by
heart.
The mate at the calculator in the tower acknowledges the orders.
The Old Man behaves as though all this liturgical antiphony has
nothing to do with him. Only the tension in his stance betrays his acute
awareness of everything that's going on.
The First Watch Officer now reports to the mate in the tower:
"Enemy position bow right--angle fifty--enemy speed ten knots-- range ten
thousand feet--torpedo speed thirty--depth ten--position changing."
The First Watch Officer doesn't need to worry about the proper lead
angle for the torpedoes. The position calculator computes that. The
calculator is connected directly with the gyrocompass and the TBT column,
along with the torpedoes, whose steering mechanism is thus continuously
adjusted. Every change in the boat's course is automatically translated
for the torpedoes. All the First Watch Officer has to do is keep the
target in the crosshairs of the glasses on the TBT column.
He bends over the eyepiece. "Ready for comparison reading! . . .
Variation . . . Zero!"
"_Must_ work," the Commander murmurs. Once more he glances up at
the moon. The second cloud has stopped, like a captive balloon that has
reached its predetermined height. Three handbreadths below the moon:
There it hangs, and doesn't budge.
"One good push!" The navigator shakes his clenched fist; an
outburst of feeling from so quiet a man as Kriechbaum amazes me. But
there's no time to muse over the navigator; the Commander jerks his face
sharply around and orders: "Full speed ahead! Hard a-port! Commence
attack! Open torpedo doors!"
From below come the shouted repetitions of the commands. The bow is
already beginning to swing along the horizon--seeking the shadows.
"Midships!--Steady as she goes! Hold ninety degrees!" The boat is
racing straight at the dark shapes, which are growing larger by the
second.
The plowshare of the bow cuts into the shining sea, hurling aside
great masses of sparkling water. The wave surges, glints with a thousand 
facets. The foreship rises. Immediately spray sweeps over us. The diesels
are running at full speed. The bulwark quivers.
"Find your target!" the Commander orders.
The First Watch Officer remains bent over the sight.
"There, those two overlapping ones, we'll take them. Have you got
them? To the left, beside the single freighter! The big one will need a
double shot, the others singles. Fire a double, one at the forward edge
of the bridge and one just ahead of the aftermast!"
I'm standing close behind the Commander.
"Tubes one to four clear!"
My heart is hammering in my throat, and I can't think straight. The
roaring engines, the shadows, the silver sea, the moon, the final charge!
We're meant to be a U-boat--let's pray everything goes right.
The First Watch Officer keeps the target in his sights. His mouth
is downturned, his voice matter of fact and dry. He's constantly revising
his figures. He already has his right hand on the firing lever.
"Connect tubes one and two--angle sixty-five--follow changing
angle!"
"Request angle!"
"Angle seventy ... angle eighty!"
Close beside me I hear the Commander say, "Tubes one and two,
permission to fire!"
Seconds later the First Watch Officer orders, "Tubes one and two
fire!"
I strain all my senses: no report--no jolt--nothing! The boat races
on, even closer to the freighters.
They've noticed nothing!--nothing!
"Connect tube three!"
"Tube three--fire!"
"Port ten!" orders the Commander.
Once more the bow moves, searching, along the chain of ships.
"Connect tube four!" from the First Watch Officer. He waits until
the new target is in position and orders, "Tube four--fire!"
It's at this moment, close beside the target steamer, that I
discover a long, low ship--a shadow that's not as dark as the others--
probably painted gray.
"Hard a-port! Connect stern tube!" That was the Commander. The boat
heels heavily as she turns. The shadows move to starboard.
The navigator calls, "Vessel veering this way!"
I see that our stern is now aimed at the shadows. But I also see
that the light-colored shape is narrowing. I can even see the thread of
her bow wave.
"Tube five--fire! Hard a-starboard!" shouts the Commander. The boat
has barely swung toward the other side when orange-red lightning blazes
up, followed in a fraction of a second by another flash. A mighty fist
strikes me in the knees, and a sharp whistling goes through me like cold
steel.
"They're firing, the bastards! ALARM!" roars the Old Man.
With one jump I'm in the hatch and let myself fall through.
Seaboots land on my shoulders. I leap away, jammed up against the chart
table, doubled over with pain. Someone goes rolling across the floor in
front of me.
"Flood!" shouts the Commander, and immediately afterward, "Hard aport!" There's a dash of water from above. Our high speed is forcing the 
boat down at a steeper angle than usual, but the Commander still orders,
"All hands forward!"
"That was damned good!" he exclaims as he catches up with us.
I have some difficulty realizing that this is praise for the enemy
artillery. The cavalcade of men goes stumbling through the compartment. I
catch terrified looks. Everything begins to slide. The leather jackets
and the binoculars on their hooks to right and left of the hatch are
standing out from the walls.
The needle of the depth manometer sweeps over the scale, till the
Chief finally orders the hydroplanes reversed. The jackets and binoculars
sink slowly--very gradually--back toward the walls. The boat returns to
an even keel.
I can't catch the Commander's eye. "That was damned good"--
anything better and we'd have been done for. I can think of only one
thing: the torpedoes--what about the torpedoes?
"Just as I thought--it was a destroyer," says the Commander. He
sounds short of breath. I can see his chest heaving. He looks us over as
if to assure himself that everyone's present, then mutters, "The return
engagement is about to begin."
The destroyer! At such close range! The Old Man must have known for
some time that the pale shadow was no freighter. The Tommies' destroyers
are light gray, just like ours.
There's a destroyer coming hell for leather straight at our diving
point! "The return engagement!" It's going to be a pretty explosive one.
"Take her down to three hundred feet--slowly," orders the Old Man.
The Chief repeats the order in a low voice. He's crouching behind
the hydroplane operators, his eyes fixed on the manometer.
A whisper: "Now we're in for it!"
Make yourself heavy, make yourself small, shrink!
Our torpedoes! Did they all miss? Can that happen? Five of them? A
double and two singles and the stern tube as well while we were turning.
Admittedly the shot from tube five was hastily aimed, but the others! Why
no explosion?
The Chief brings his head even closer to the round eye of the
manometer. On his forehead, sweat sparkles like pearls of dew. I see the
single drops link up, making trails down his face like snail tracks. He
wipes his forehead impatiently with the back of his hand.
We've barely moved an inch.
They'll be above us any moment now.
What went wrong? Why no explosions?
Everyone stands silent, brooding. The needle of the depth manometer
moves another ten divisions.
I try to think clearly. How long since we dived?--How fast was that
destroyer moving?--Misses!--A1l misses!--These shitty torpedoes!--The
familiar suspicions--Sabotage! What else could it be? Faulty steering
mechanisms, the bastards! And any minute now the Tommies will be ripping
our asses up! The Old Man must have been out of his mind. What he did was
a torpedo boat attack! On the surface! Straight up and at 'em. They can't
have believed their eyes! How many yards' range was it, anyway? How many
seconds for a destroyer to reach us at top speed? Those garbled steering
orders! The turn!--Crazy: The Old Man had ordered hard a-port just as we
were diving. That's something you never do. What can he have been up to?
Then I get it: The Tommies saw us diving away to starboard. The Old Man
was trying to fool them--let's hope they're not as crafty as we are!
The Old Man rests one thigh on the chart chest. All I see of him is
his bent back and the dim white of his cap over the upturned collar of
his fur-lined vest.
The navigator's eyes are almost completely closed: slits carved in
wood with a sharp chisel. He's sucking his lips between his teeth. His
right hand holding fast to the housing of the sky periscope. Six feet
away, the control-room mate's face is no more than a pale blob.
A dull, smothered sound breaks the silence--like a stick hitting a
slack drumhead.
"That one got it!" whispers the Commander. He raises his head
abruptly, and I can see his face. His eyes are squinting, his mouth
stretched wide.
Another dull concussion.
"And that one too! Damned slow running time," he adds dryly.
What is he talking about? Torpedoes? Have two of them hit?
The Second Watch Officer has straightened up. His fists are knotted
and he's baring his clenched teeth like an ape. It's obvious he wants
desperately to shout. But he only swallows and chokes. The grimace stays
frozen on his face.
The needle of the depth manometer keeps moving slowly over the
dial.
Another drumbeat.
"Number three!" says someone.
These dull detonations--is that all there is to it? I squeeze my
eyes shut. All my nerves seem to be concentrated in my ear canals. Is
that all there's going to be?
Then there's a sound like a sheet being slowly torn in two,
followed by a second sheet being rapidly ripped to shreds. After that, a
violent rasping of metal, and now all around us nothing but tearing,
grating, knocking, cracking.
I've been holding my breath so long that I have to fight for air.
Dammit. What's happening now?
The Old Man raises his head.
"Two of them going down, navigator--there are two, wouldn't you
say?"
The noise--is that the bulkheads bursting?
"They've--had--it!" The Old Man drags the words out in long
breaths.
No one moves. No one gives a victory yell. The control-room mate is
standing beside me, motionless, in his usual position, one hand on the
ladder, head turned to face the depth manometer. The two hydroplane
operators: stiff folds in rubber suits, sou'westers gleaming with
moisture. The pale eye of the manometer: the pointer steady now. Then I
register: The hydroplane operators are actually still wearing their
sou'westers!
"Damned slow running time. I'd already given up." The Commander's
voice is back to its usual dark growl. The breaking and cracking, roaring
and tearing show no sign of coming to an end.
"Now _there's_ a couple of boats you can write off for good."
Then a shattering blow knocks me off my feet. In the nick of time I
catch hold of a pipe to break my fall. There's a crash of breaking glass.
I pull myself upright, automatically stagger forward a couple of
steps, jostle against someone, collide with a hard corner, and collapse
into the hatch frame.
This is it. The reckoning! Mustn't let yourself go! I press my
left shoulder hard against the metal frame of the hatch and make myself
as heavy as I can. I use both hands to seize the pipe that runs under my
thighs. My own special place. My hands touch the smooth enamel paint and
feel the rust on the underside of the pipe. An iron grip. Like a vise. I
stare intently at the back of my left hand, then my right, as though
staring could make them grip all the harder.
Where's the next?
I raise my hunched head very slowly, like a turtle, ready to
retract it instantly when the expected blow comes. All I hear is someone
sniffing violently.
My eyes seem to be drawn magnetically to the Commander's cap. He
takes a step--and his cap and the red and white scales on either side of
the water gauge become part of a single image: clowns' striped whips. Or
the oversized lollipops that stand like flowers in jars in the windows of
Parisian confectioners. All-day suckers. Or the beacon lighthouse that we
saw on the port bow as we left the harbor. That was painted red and white
too.
The hatch frame almost bucks me out. An enormous detonation tries
to shatter my eardrums. Then blow after blow, as if the sea were a mass
of huge powder kegs being set off in quick succession.
A multiple drop.
Christ, that was accurate! That was their second charge. They're no
fools, and they didn't fall for our bluff.
My guts contract.
Outside, nothing but rearing, gurgling, rumbling! Undersea
whirlpools seize the boat, tossing it violently this way and that.
Luckily, I'm so firmly wedged I might as well be in a gyrowheel.
Suddenly the gurgling of the water, pouring back on itself to fill
the vacuum left by the explosions, ebbs away, but we can still hear the
dull roaring, knocking, and breaking up of the other boats.
The Commander laughs like a madman. "They're certainly going down--
well, that saves us a parting shot. Too bad we can't watch the tubs go
under, though."
I blink in exasperation. But already the Old Man's voice is matter
of fact again. "That was the second strike!"
I become aware of the voice of the hydrophone operator. My powers
of perception must have been partially suspended. The operator must have
been giving continuous reports, but I haven't heard a word.
"Destroyer bearing thirty degrees to port. Getting louder fast!"
The Commander's eyes are fixed on the operator's lips. "Any
change?"
The operator hesitates. Finally he reports, "Sound receding
astern!"
The Commander immediately orders an increase in speed. Now I can
finally clear the fog from my brain, follow what is going on, and think
with the others. The hope is that the destroyer will cross our course a
good way astern, which is obviously what the Old Man's after.
We still don't know which way the destroyer will turn in its
renewed attempt to pass overhead--the Old Man must be guessing that it'll
be to port, for he has the helm put hard to starboard.
The chief mechanic Franz comes into the room. His face is
chalkwhite. Beads of sweat gleam like glycerin on his forehead. Although
there are no waves to worry about, he hangs on first with his left hand, 
then with his right. "They've got us!" he blurts out. Then he shouts for
safety cassettes for the gyrocompass.
"Stop that racket!" the Commander rounds on him angrily.
Four detonations in quick succession, almost a single blow. But the
deep whirlpools don't reach us.
"Astern--way astern!" the Old Man jeers. "Not as easy as all that."
He props his left leg against the chart table, then undoes the
buttons of his collar. He's making himself comfortable. He pushes his
hands into the pockets of his leather trousers and turns to the
navigator.
Another single detonation--not close, but the echo is remarkably
long. The bubbling and roaring seem never-ending.
Through the dull hubbub comes the Old Man's voice. "They're
spitting in the wrong corner."
The destroyer certainly seems to have faulty bearings--another
couple of distant detonations. But we're still tormented by the
acoustical aftermath of every bomb--even those that explode several
thousand yards away. The enemy knows how demoralizing this can be, even
if the bombs fall wide of the mark.
"Take this down, navigator."
"_Jawohl_, Herr Kaleun."
"'22.40 hours proceed to attack'--22.40 hours is right, isn't it,
navigator?--'proceed to attack. Columns running in close formation--yes,
close formation. How many columns we don't need to say. 'Destroyers
clearly visible up ahead and on the moonlit side...'"
How's that? Clearly visible? Destroyers clearly visible up ahead .
. . So there's more than one? My mouth goes dry. The Old Man didn't say a
word about it. On the contrary, he was acting the whole time as if there
were no escort on the side we were attacking.
"'...clearly visible.' Have you got that? 'Attack on starboard side
of second column'--got that too?"
"_Jawohl_, Herr Kaleun."
"'Moon very bright...'"
"You can say that again," murmurs the Second Watch Officer, but so
softly the Commander can't hear him.
"'... very bright--but not bright enough to necessitate underwater
attack...'"
I have to get up to make way for the men who ended up in the bow
compartment when "All hands forward!" was ordered, and who now want to
get back through the hatch. They tiptoe past like tightrope walkers to
avoid making any noise.
The Old Man orders the boat down farther and to hold depth and
course for about five minutes. And when the hydrophone operator announces
a new attack he takes us deeper still. He's betting that the people in
the destroyer won't have caught this second maneuver and therefore that
they'll be setting their canisters to go off at the previous depth . .
the one we were holding just long enough to make sure their sound men got
a good reading.
New reports from the operator. No doubt about it: the destroyer is
on our heels.
Despite the urgency in the operator's voice the Old Man gives no
new orders to the helmsman. I know: he's postponing any change in course
until the last moment, so the destroyer that's speeding after us won't
have time to copy our maneuver. Hare and hound! Only when the dog is 
about to snap--when he's sure the hare is already in his jaws--does the
hare swerve, hut the dog can't make the turn: His own momentum is too
great.
The analogy doesn't totally fit our case, I admit--we're not as
fast as the hare and our turning circle is too big. Indeed, it doesn't
fit at all: The destroyer an always turn faster than we can. But if it's
running full speed and wants to change course, it too is thrown off. A
tin can like that simply has too little draft.
"Not had shooting. Azimuth damned good. They just aimed a little
too high Then the Old Man orders, "Hard a-starboard. Port motor full
speed ahead!"
All the auxiliary machines have long since been turned off: the
radio transformer, the vei tilators, even the gyrocompass. I hardly dare
breathe, Quiet as a mouse. \Vbiat does that mean, "Quiet as a mouse"? The
cat up there--we mice down here? Any way, don't move!
They really should have got us on the first attack--they were so
close to our diving point. But the Old Man was too clever for them. First
he turned our narrow silhouette toward theirs. And then the turn to
starboard--and the dive, but with the rudder hard a-port. Like a player
taking a goal kick who looks at one corner of the net and kicks at the
other.
The Old Man favors me with a nod. "We're not through with them yet.
Tough lot. They're no beginners."
"Really," is all I manage.
"Though they must be getting a trifle annoyed by now," he adds.
He orders us down farther; five hundred feet. Going by the
operator's reports, the destroyer must be following us around on a leash.
At any moment they can signal their engines full speed ahead and start
attacking. What we need is a faster boat.
The Old Man orders higher speed. This involves all sorts of risks,
because the faster the motors run the more racket they make. The Tommies
must be able to hear our E-motors just by using their ears. But the
Commander's prime concern is probably to get out of range of the enemy's
direction finder.
"Destroyer getting louder!" the operator announces in a low voice.
The Commander whispers an order for us to reduce speed again. So it
didn't work. We didn't manage to break away. They're still after us.
They're not going to let themselves be shaken off; they'd rather let
their scows wallow along without protection. After all, positive location
of a U-boat is no everyday occurrence.
A gigantic sledgehammer hits the boat. At almost the same instant,
the Old Man orders the bilge pumps turned on and the speed increased. As
soon as the tumult outside ebbs away he has the pumps stopped and the
motors reduced to slow. "Thirteen-- fourteen," the navigator counts, and
makes two new marks on his slate. So that was two bombs. I count: first
we had four. Then the second drop, the multiple ejection, was counted as
six. Does that check? I recalculate.
Another three, four blows--so violent that the floor plates
clatter. I feel the detonations right down to my stomach. Cautiously I
turn my head. The navigator's chalking up four.
The Old Man hasn't budged an inch. He holds his head so that he has
one eye on the depth manometer and his left ear turned toward the sound
room.
"They really don't seem to like us." That from the ensign.
Unbelievable: He actually said something. Now he's staring at the floor
plates: The sentence must have escaped him involuntarily. Everyone heard.
The navigator is grinning, and the Old Man turns his head. For an instant
there's a trace of amusement on his face.
The pebbles. At first it sounds like no more than a handful of
coarse sand thrown against our port side. But now it's garden gravel,
three, four scoops, one after the other. Their Asdic. It feels like being
suddenly lit up from all sides, as if we were lying exposed on a huge
stage in full view of the audience.
"Swine!" mutters the control-room mate half to himself. For a
moment I hate them too, but after all, who or what are "they": the hard
singing of the screws, the hornet buzz, the rattle of gravel against the
boat's side? That shadow, the narrow silhouette that was only a shade
brighter than the freighters--that's all I've been able to see of the
enemy .
The whites of their eyes! For us, that's pure rubbish! We've lost
our sight. No more seeing--only listening. Ear against the wall! So why
no new report from our eavesdropper-in-chief? The Commander is blinking
impatiently. Nothing?
_All ears harken unto Thee, 0 Lord, for Thou wilt bring great foy
to those who trust in Thy word_--or something like that. The Bible
Scholar would have the exact quote; he's hardly recognizable in the dusky
light. The hydrophone operator raises his eyebrows. That's another sign:
won't be long before everyone's ears are busy again.
_They have ears, and hear not_. One of the Psalms of David. I'm all
ears. I am one gigantic ear, all my nerves a single listening knot;
they've twined themselves like fine elfin hair around hammer, anvil, and
stirrup.
A box on the ears--we've had plenty of those--lend a willing ear--
walls have ears--pull the wool over someone's ears . . . Of course,
_that's_ it: they want to skin us, pull our hide over our ears.
How do things look on the surface now?
There's sure to be a murderous amount of illumination. All
searchlights on, and the sky studded with parachute flares so that the
archenemy can't escape. All cannon barrels lowered and ready to be fired
at once if they succeed in forcing us to the surface.
The operator reports, "Destroyer bearing twenty degrees. Getting
louder fast!" And after a short hesitation, "Commencing attack!"
Two ax blows hit the boat broadside. More wild roaring and
gurgling. Then two more blows in the midst of the raging tumult.
I've opened my mouth the way artillery men do so that my eardrums
won't burst. After all, I was trained as a naval gunner. But now I'm not
next to a cannon; I'm on the other end, in the midst of the bursting
shells.
There's no getting away from here. No use throwing yourself flat.
Digging in--that's a laugh: what we have under our feet are iron floor
plates covered with cunt patterns, as Zeitler calls the thousand little
shapes. I exert all my self-control to suppress claustrophobia, the
damnable urge to flee in any direction. Keep your feet nailed to the
floor! I pray for lead in the soles of my shoes, like those bright,
barrel-shaped toy figures that always bob up again however you knock them
down. Thank god, I can remember what they're called. Standup men . . . 
standup men, incense men, humming tops, fancy nutcrackers. Bright pretty
toys.
When you think about it, I'm well off. I can't be knocked over
either. The frame of the hatch in which I'm crouching is the best place
to be at a time like this.
I loosen my grip on the pipe. Apparently it's safe to relax. Ease
the muscle cramp, move the jawbone, rest the skeleton, relax the belly
muscles, let the blood circulate. For the first time I realize how
painful my contortions have been.
Our every move is defined by our opponents. The Tommies can even
decide what positions we must assume. We draw our heads in, huddle
waiting for the impact of the detonation, and stretch and loosen up once
the roaring begins outside. Even the Old Man is careful not to unleash
his derisive laughter except during the gurgling that follows the
explosions.
The operator half opens his mouth. Immediately I catch my breath
again. What now? If only I knew where the last series fell, just how far
from the boat the bombs exploded or how far we are from our diving point!
After our first unsuccessful attempt to break away, it seems as though
the pursuit has gone around and around in circles--first to the right,
then to the left, up and down, like a rollercoaster ride. We haven't made
any ground at all. Every attempt so far to break out sideways and find
cover has been spotted by the enemy.
The operator closes his mouth and opens it again. He looks like a
carp in a tank at the fish st are. Open, shut, and then open again. He
announces a new attack.
And then immediately calls "Asdic!" hoarsely from the sound room.
He could have saved himself the trouble. Everyone in the control room has
heard the _ping-ping_. As have the men in the bow compartment on top of
the torpedoes, and aft in the motor room and diesel room.
The enemy has got us trapped in the tentacles of the direction
finder. Right now they're turning steel hand wheels and searching through
three dimensions with pulsing beams--_zirp--zirp--ping-- ping_...
The Asdic, I remind myself, is only effective up to a speed of
about thirteen knots. During a fast attack the destroyer no longer has
directional contact. At higher speeds the Asdic suffers major
interference from the destroyer's own noises and the commotion of its
screws, which is an advantage for us, since it gives us a last-minute
opportunity to make minor changes in our position. But the Commander up
there is also capable of figuring out that we won't stand still and wait
for the attack. Only: which way we move is the one thing his directional
boys can't tell him. There he has to use his intuition.
One break for us is that our enemy and his clever machine can't
tell exactly how deep we are. In this, nature is on our side: water is
not simply water; right down through our present depth it forms layers
like sedimentary rock. The salt content and the physical characteristics
of the individual layers are never the same. And they scatter the Asdic.
All we have to do is move suddenly from a layer of warm water into a cold
one and the Asdic becomes inaccurate. A layer of dense plankton will
influence it too. And the people up there with their apparatus can't
correct their plotting of our position with any confidence because they
don't know where these damn layers are.
Herrmann is working away at his wheel.
"Report!" says the Old Man in the direction of the sound room.
"Sounds bearing three hundred fifty degrees."
In less than five minutes the screws are audible to the naked ear.
_Ritschipitschipitschipitschi_--that's no full-speed attack. The
destroyer is moving just fast enough to be able to go on tracking us, and
the Asdic echoes loud and clear.
A fresh attack. Four, five detonations. Close. Against closed
eyelids I project jets of flame, towering St. Elmo's fire, the ffickering
gleam of chrysoprase, cascading sparks around dark-red central cores,
dazzling white naphtha flames, whirling Chinese pinwheels, blinding
surges, amethyst beams piercing the darkness, an enormous fiery holocaust
loosed from rainbow-haloed fountains of bronze.
"Exercise maneuvers," whispers the Old Man.
I wouldn't call them that.
A gigantic fist comes down and shakes the boat. I feel the thrust
in my knees as we're jolted upward. The needle of the depth indicator
jerks back. The light goes out, and there's the sound of breaking glass.
My heart is pounding--finally the emergency light goes on.
I see the Old Man biting his lower lip. It's the moment of
decision. Does he take the boat down to the depth where the last bombs
exploded or up a few hundred feet?
He orders a turn and a simultaneous dive. Back down the
rollercoaster again. One--two--three--but where? Up? Down? Left? The last
surge made it sound as if the bombs had been forward and to port of us.
But were they above or below the boat? Here we go again. The operator
resumes his reports.
The blow hits me right on the third dorsal vertebra. Followed by
another--and another: two straight punches to the back of the head and
the neck.
Smoke is beginning to swirl out from the helmsman's station. To
crown everything else, are we going to have a fire? Are those cables
beginning to smolder? And won't that cause short circuits?
Calm down! Nothing can happen to this scow: _I_ am on board. _I_ am
immortal. With me on board the boat is immune.
No doubt about it--the instrument panel is on fire! The sign on the
Minimax: _Keep calm! Fight fire from below_. My brain keeps repeating:
immune--immune--immune.
The control-room mate springs into action and almost disappears in
the flames and smoke. Two or three men go to his assistance. I notice
that the boat is bow heavy--more and more so. I hear, "Valve--bilge duct
broken." But that can't be all there is to it! Why doesn't the Chief trim
toward the stern? What else are our trim tanks for, if not to act as a
balancing rod?
Although the destroyer must be quite close, the Old Man orders full
speed ahead. Of course! We already have too much water in the boat; we
can no longer manage to keep her buoyant. We need the power of the screws
and their pressure on the hydroplanes to make the boat stern heavy fast.
Otherwise the Old Man would never create such a racket: at this speed
it's like having a cowbell around our neck. Dilemma: to sink or speed up.
The Tommies up there must be able to hear us--motors, screws, and bilge
pump--with their own ears. They might just as well turn off their Asdic
and save the current.
In addition to his complicated course calculations, the Old Man now
has to worry constantly about the boat's depth. We're in a tricky
situation, If it were only a question of surfacing, that wouldn't take 
much: "Don rescue gear," and blow the tanks with everything we've got.
Don't even think about it!
Everything's wet, covered in condensation.
"Driving-shaft gaskets making water!" someone shouts from the
stern. Immediately followed, from forward, by ". . . valve leaking!" I'm
no longer paying much attention. Why bother worrying about which valve it
might be.
Four detonations in quick succession, then the mad gurgle and roar
of the black flood rushing back into the huge hollows torn out by the
bombs.
"Thirty-three--four--five--thirty-six," the navigator counts in a
loud voice. That time it was close!
We're now at four hundred feet.
The Old Man takes us deeper and turns the boat to port.
The next detonation slams my teeth together. I can hear sobbing.
The new control-room assistant? Surely he's not going to have a fit of
hysterics?
"Nice shooting!" the Old Man jeers loudly as the next detonations
surge over us.
I tense my stomach muscles as if to protect my organs against a ton
of pressure. It's some minutes before I dare release my left hand from
its grip on the pipe. It rises of its own volition and brushes across my
forehead: cold sweat. My whole back feels equally clammy. Fear?
I seem to be seeing the Commander's face through a fog.
It's the smoke from the helmsman's station still hanging in the
room, although the smoldering has stopped. There's a sour taste in my
mouth and a dull pressure somewhere in my head. I hold my breath; it only
makes the pressure worse.
Any moment and it'll be time again--the destroyer will have
completed its circle. The pack of hounds has to grant us this brief
respite whether they want to or not.
There's the Asdic again. Two or three sharp rattles of pebbles. A
cold hand creeps under my collar and runs down my back. I shudder.
The pressure in my head becomes unbearable. What now? Why is
nothing happening? Every whisper has died away. The condensation pitterpatters at steady one-second intervals. Silently I count them. At twentytwo the blow lands, doubling me over with my head crumpled against my
chest.
Am I deaf? I see the floor plates dancing, but it's seconds before
I hear their metallic clatter, mixed with a yowling, groaning sound and a
high-pitched screech. The pressure hull! It can't be anything else. The
boat heaves and pitches in the rearing eddies. Men stagger against one
another.
Another double blast. The boat groans. Clattering scraping sounds.
The Tommies are being economical. No more carpeting--instead,
always two bombs at a time, probably set for different depths. I dare not
relax my muscles--the hammer lands again with enormous force.
A gurgling, coughing gasp quite close to me turns into a moan.
Sounds as if someone has been hit. It confuses me momentarily, but then
reality reasserts itself: don't be crazy, no one gets shot down here.
The Old Man has got to think up something new. No chance of
sneaking away. The Asdic won't let us go. They've got first-class men
sitting up there at the controls, and they're not easily bluffed. How
much time do we have left? How much do the Tommies need to circle?
Lucky for us that they can't drop their bombs overboard whenever
they want. They have to be running at full speed before they fire. If
those bastards could use their Asdic to sneak up right over the boat
before dropping their cans, this cat and mouse game would have been over
long ago. As it is, they have to attack at high speed so as not to blow
themselves out of the water when their bombs go off.
What's the Old Man up to now? It's making him frown. I can tell
from the way his brows are twitching that he's deep in concentration. How
long will he go on waiting? Can he pull off another last-minute swerve to
escape the advancing destroyer?--and in the right direction?--at the
right speed?--and the right depth?
It's high time he opened his mouth and gave an order. Or has he
given up? Thrown in the sponge?
Suddenly a sound like canvas being ripped. The Commander's voice
crackles out at the same moment: "Bail!--Hard a-port! And gun those
goddam motors!"
The boat leaps forward. The noise of the bilge pump is drowned in
the roar that fills the sea around us. Men stagger and clutch the pipes.
The Old Man doesn't budge. The navigator clings to his table.
The Old Man's gamble suddenly dawns on me. He's ordered us to hold
a straight course, even though we've been spotted. A new wrinkle. A
variation he hasn't tried on the Tommies before. Obvious: The Commander
of the destroyer wasn't born yesterday. He doesn't come rushing blindly
to the spot where they've located us. They know our tricks. They know
that we know they're attacking; they know that we know they can't use
their Asdic at high speed, that we'll try to escape their line of attack
and also change depth. Whether we feint to port or to starboard, whether
we head up or down is something they can only guess at. They have to rely
on luck.
And so the Old Man stops playing tricks for once and simply holds
his course and depth until the next drop. Bluff and double bluff. And
just when you think you're lucky--bang! You get it up the ass!
"Time?" asks the Commander.
"01.30 hours," the navigator replies.
"Really?" There's astonishment in his voice. Even he seems to be
finding the dance a trifle drawn out.
"Most unusual," he murmurs. "But they probably want to be
absolutely sure."
For a while nothing stirs. The Old Man orders us deeper. Then
deeper still.
"Time."
"01.45 hours!"
Unless my ears are really playing tricks on me, even the compass
motor has been shut off. Not a sound in the boat. Only the pitterpatter
of condensation ticking off the seconds.
Have we made it? How far have we gone in a quarter of an hour's
silent running? Then the stillness is broken again by the hideous noises
that the Old Man calls "creaking in the beams": Our steel cylinder is
being brutally tested for resistance by the pressure at these depths. The
steel skin is bulging inward between the ribs. The interior woodwork
groans.
We're down at 650 feet again, more than twice the shipyard
guaranty, creeping along through the blackness at a speed of four knots
with this vast column of water sitting on top of us.
Operating the hydroplanes becomes a balancing trick. If the boat
sinks any lower, its tortured fabric may no longer be able to withstand
the external pressure. A matter of inches could be crucial. Is the Old
Man counting on the Tommies not knowing our maximum diving depth? We
ourselves never mention this magic number in feet but say, "Three times r
plus sixty." An incantation. Could the Tommies really not know how much r
is? Every stoker knows; probably fifty thousand Germans do, all told.
No reports from the operator. I can't believe we've escaped. The
bastards are probably lying in wait, engines stopped. They know that they
were almost directly above us. The only thing they couldn't calculate was
our depth, and the Old Man has taken extreme measures about that. The
Chief moves his head back and forth uneasily. Nothing seems to rasp on
his nerves so much as the creaking in the woodwork.
Two detonations. Bearable. The gurgling is cut short at a stroke.
But our bilge pump keeps going for several seconds more! They must have
heard the damn thing. You'd think someone could build quieter ones.
The longer we remain at these depths, the more tormenting the
thought of how thin our steel hull is. We aren't armor-plated. All we
have to withstand the pressure of the water and the shock waves of the
explosions is a mere inch of steel. The circular ribs--two every three
feet--are all that give our thin-walled tube the meager powers of
resistance that enable us to stay alive down here.
"They're taking one helluva time to get ready," whispers the Old
Man. We must be dealing with some really clever bastards if even he
admits it.
I try to picture what's going on up there. I have my own memories
to help me, for after all it's not so long since I was one of the
hunters, on a destroyer myself. It's the same game on both sides except
that the Tommies have their highly perfected Asdic and we have nothing
but our sound gear. It's the difference between electronics and
acoustics.
Listen--make a run--drop the bombs--circle--listen--make a run--
drop more bombs--try setting them for shallow depths--then for deeper
ones--then the star act: the spread--launch at least a dozen canisters
simultaneously--like drumfire. The same thing the Tommies do.
Each one of our depth charges contained four hundred pounds of
amatol. So a dozen bombs had more than two tons of high explosive. When
we had a good directional indication on the S-apparatus, all the ejectors
were fired at once: starboard, port, and aft. I can still hear the
Captain's voice: "Not very sporting, this king of thing."
Very odd that nothing is happening. Marking time--given up? Perhaps
I can ease the tension in my muscles. But careful--mustn't jump if it
begins again. Annihilation by whirlpool, with time out now and again.
Fear of the next onslaught begins to grow. Quick--think about something
else.
The time we made sonar contact close to the southwest corner of
England. On the destroyer _Karl Galster_--nothing but guns and machines.
The frightened voice from the starboard wing of the bridge: "Torpedo
trail three points to the starboard!" The voice still rings in my ears:
hoarse, yet piercing. Unforgettable, if I live to be a hundred,
The trail of bubbles--crystal clear. An eternity before the pale
track of our wake finally curved to one side.
I have to swallow. Fear grips me by the throat--double fear-- both
remembered and actual. My thoughts race. Must be careful not to get them 
mixed up. "Torpedo trail three points to starboard." That was on the
_Karl Gaister_. The overpowering, mind-numbing tension. And then the
voice of salvation. "Torpedo trail passed astern!"
Just endure, last .out each round. How long has it been so far? I
still don't dare move. This time I'm one of the hunted. Trapped in the
deep. On a boat with no more torpedoes in its tubes. Defenseless, even if
we manage to surface.
How the Captain of the _Karl Galster_ pulled it off! He must have
got clear by a matter of inches. Full rudder and engines going full speed
until the ship swung round parallel to the torpedo's course. The
vibrations! As if she were about to fly to pieces. And then the shrill
bell: a warning for the men in the engine room to expect an explosion.
Then the torpedo officer's voice on the ship's phone: "Fire two charges!"
And the breathless waiting, until a double blow made the ship shiver in
every seam. Nothing to be seen but two white, shimmering splashes astern,
to left and right of the fading glimmer of our wake--as if two great
lumps of rock had fallen into the water.
Then the order: "Hard a-port!" And the Captain reduced speed so
that the men below in the belly of the ship could get a more accurate
bearing: the same tactics used by the Tommies, precisely the same. Full
ahead again--a perceptible leap forward--and off toward the echo we'd
picked up on our sonar.
The Captain ordered a spread to be dropped at the point where the
equipment reacted most strongly. Canisters all set for the same shallow
depth. Short, sharp thunderclaps. Then a rumbling as if we'd hit a mine.
I can still see the huge, gleaming white geysers standing poised
majestically for seconds before they collapsed in spray. And the foam
that came blowing over us like wet curtains.
The Old Man keeps staring at the manometers, as if his eyes could
control the play of the needles. But the needles don't move. No Asdic
either. The sound man looks like someone lost in pious meditation. I
wonder why they're not on the move up there, why nothing is happening. At
four knots per hour we can't possibly have escaped the net of their
direction finder.
"Steer two hundred twenty degrees," the Old Man orders.
More silence.
"Heading two hundred twenty degrees," comes the helmsman's
whispered response after a considerable lag.
"Propeller sounds bearing twenty degrees, fading," is the next
hushed report. It brings a mocking grin to the Old Man's face.
I put myself back on the bridge of the _Karl Galster_: pale
moonlight on cold, expressionless faces. No matter how hard we stared, no
sign of the enemy. Just orders, the splash of the canisters, the third of
the explosions. Cross-bearings and new drops. Seething white patches
disrupting the pale filigree of our wake.
And then an oil slick on the black water. Once again I see the
sharply-etched, thin white finger of the searchlight pointing it out. The
ship swings toward it. There's no mercy: "Port bombs away! Starboard
bombs away!"
All guns trained on the oil slick, muzzles lowered.
I can still see all the fish with ruptured air bladders floating on
the surface of the water in the beam of the searchlight. Fish and more
fish--but no sign of wreckage, only the fleck of oil. Suddenly our sound
equipment fell silent.
No time for a search. Cruisers might appear at any moment and bar
our passage home. The Captain had to head for Brest whether he wanted to
or not. And that was when he said, "Not very sporting, this kind of
thing."
The operator's voice suddenly penetrates my consciousness. If I
understood him correctly, the destroyer is swinging toward us. So they're
attacking again. They were just playing us on a line. Cat and mouse
stuff. No hope of escape. We didn't fool them.
The operator is grimacing again. I start counting silently, and
then the blows begin, one after the other. We're flung around, jolted.
The whole sea is a single exploding powder keg.
And again the gushing roar that will not stop, and more propeller
noises! But why no pause between them? Where are the propellers coming
from again so quickly? That's the easygoing paddling of slow screws, not
the quick ringing whirl with its wicked, whistling, underlying howl that
indicates top speed.
In the back of my mind I realize what's been going on: this can't
be the destroyer that attacked us first--she couldn't be back so soon.
She needs time to circle. After all, she can't be coming at us sternfirst
. . .
There's no delay about the next bombs. They come in triplets.
The light has gone out. Someone calls for emergency light. The
Chief shines the beam of his pocket flashlight on the depth manometer. He
doesn't dare let his eyes leave the dial for so much as a second: We're
so deep that any further descent is dangerous.
"Report sound bearings!"
"Nine points to port," the operator replies.
"Hard a-starboard, steer three hundred ten degrees."
The Commander is trying to make use of our narrow silhouette,
exactly as he did on the surface. He wants to present our stern to the
enemy so as to give the Asdic beams the smallest possible surface to work
on.
"Propeller sounds bearing two hundred degrees--getting stronger!"
The directional beam hits us again. I'm rigid, totally unable to
relax; my head will soon crack like glass. My skull seems under the same
extreme pressure as our steel skin. The slightest touch now would be too
much. My heartbeats ring magnified in my ears. I try shaking my head, but
the pounding goes on just the same.
"Brace yourself," I whisper to myself. Fear bordering on hysteria
seems to be literally destroying my mind. Yet at the same time it's
sharpening my powers of perception. I see and feel everything going on
around me with astounding clarity.
"Range?. . . And what about the second sound?" The Old Man's voice
is no longer indifferent.
So--I wasn't making it up. Damn, damn, and double damn, the Old
Man's calm is gone. Was it the second sound that disconcerted him? But
everything depends on him keeping a clear head. Instead of working with
precision instruments he has to use his own system of perception, which
is probably located in the seat of his pants, or in his stomach.
He's pushed his cap up and runs the back of his hand over his
forehead. His sauerkraut hair springs out from under the visor like
stuffing out of a torn mattress. His forehead is a washboard and his
sweat a stream of bleach, He bares his teeth and snaps them sharply three
times. In the silence it sounds like the faint clicking of castanets.
My left leg is asleep. Pins and needles. I lift it cautiously. The
moment I'm balancing on my right leg, a series of frightful explosions
rocks the boat. This time I find no handhold and fall full length to the
floor on my back.
Painfully I manage to turn over. I force my arms up, raise my
shoulders, and manage to get on all fours, but keep my head down ready
for the next blow,
I hear screams that seem to be coming from a long way off.
Water breach? Didn't I just hear "water breach"? Is that why we're
sinking aft? First forward, now aft .
"Aft up ten--both E-motors full ahead!"
That was the Old Man. Loud and clear. So I haven't gone deaf after
all. Full speed ahead. In this situation! Isn't that much too loud? My
god, the boat's still shuddering and groaning continuously. Sounds as if
it's battling its way through an immensely deep groundswell.
I want to lie down and hide my head in my arms.
No light. The crazy fear of drowning in the dark, unable to see the
green-white torrent of water as it comes bursting into the boat.
A beam darts over the walls and finds its goal: the depth
manometer. A sharp singing note from astern like a circular saw eating
into wood. Two or three men shake themselves out of their daze. Orders
are hissed. Another beam strikes the Old Man's face, which looks like a
gray cardboard cutout, The stern heaviness is getting worse: I can feel
it in my whole body. How long will the Old Man keep the motors running
full speed? The roar of the depth charge has long since died away. Now
anyone can hear us--anyone in the belly of the ship up there. Or can
they? Certainly they can if their ship's engines are stopped.
"Where are the reports?" I hear the Old Man growl.
I can feel with my elbow that the man standing slightly to the left
in front of me is shivering. I can't see who he is.
Once again the old temptation to let myself slump down onto the
floor. Mustn't give in.
Someone stumbles. "Silence!" the Old Man hisses.
It's now that I notice the E-motors are no longer running at full
speed. The emergency lighting goes on. So that isn't the Chief's back
over there--the Second Engineer has taken over the hydroplanes. The Chief
is nowhere to be seen. He's probably astern for the moment; all hell
seems to have been let loose back there. The evil sawmill-shriek is
unrelenting.
But we're moving. Not on an even keel, to be sure, but at least we
aren't sinking any deeper. So the pressure hull must have held. And the
motors are working.
An odd scraping sound makes me lift my head. It sounds like a cable
being dragged along outside. Sweep wires? But that's impossible! They
can't be working with sweep wires at depths like these. Perhaps it's
something new, some special kind of probing impulse.
The scraping stops. In its place we have the chirping _ping-ping_
once again. They've got us!
How late is it? I can't make out the hands of my watch. Probably
two o'clock.
"Bearing one hundred forty degrees. Getting louder!"
Again the vicious sound of the Asdic beam hitting the boat. Now
it's like pebbles being shaken in a tin can--not even loud. But loud
enough to send visions of horror darting through my mind. Cascades of 
blood dripping over the diving tanks. Red-tinged waves. Men clutching
white rags in uplifted hands. I'm well aware of what goes on when a boat
is forced to the surface. The Tommies want to see red, as much juice as
possible. They let fly with every gun they've got. They mangle the tower
while we poor bastards are scrambling up into it; they smash the bridge
to bits, make mincemeat of anything that moves, concentrating on the
diving tanks so as to make the gray whale blow the last of its air. And
then ram her down! Use their sharp bow to slash into the boat with a
howling screech. No one can blame them: There at last is the enemy for
whom they've been staring themselves blind--for days, weeks, months on
end--the treacherous tormentor who's denied them a moment's peace, even
when he was hundreds of miles away. They've never been able to be sure
for so much as a second that they weren't being spied upon from the
trough of a wave by that Polyphemus eye. And here she is finally, the
tarantula that drew blood. The blood lust won't subside until fifteen or
twenty men have been murdered.
The pressure hull creaks, crunches, and grates again. The Old Man
has been taking us deeper without my being aware of it. The Chief's eyes
are glued to the dial of the manometer, then he suddenly darts a glance
at the Old Man, but the latter behaves as if he hasn't noticed.
"What bearing now?"
"Two hundred eighty degrees--two hundred fifty-five degrees-- two
hundred forty degrees--getting louder!"
"Hard a-port!" the Commander whispers after a brief pause for
thought, and this time gives the change of course to the hydrophone
operator as well: "To sound room: We're turning to port!" And as a
commentary for us, "The usual!"
And that second noise?
Perhaps they've long since changed places, I tell myself; perhaps
the ship above us isn't the same one that attacked us with her guns.
After all, escort vessels each have different duties, The destroyer that
fired on us was carrying out flank protection. She most probably turned
over the task of finishing us off to a sweeper some time ago.
We have no idea who's attacking us.
It's fishing with dynamite: Rip open the air bladders of the fish
so that they float up from the depths--our air bladders are our diving
tanks. The fish have theirs in their bellies; with us the great air
bladders are outside, not even pressure-resistant. For a fraction of a
second I see a huge drifting gray fish that has been driven to the
surface, white belly up, rolling heavily from side to side in the waves.
. .
This infernal dripping condensation! _Pitter-patter--pitterpatter_--every single damn drop sounds like a hammer blow.
Finally the Old Man turns his head toward us: His body doesn't move
an inch. He simply twists his head as far as it will go on the turntable
of his fur collar and grins. As if invisible surgical hooks were drawing
the corners of his mouth diagonally upward--a trifle crookedly, so we can
see a fraction of an inch of white tooth in the left-hand corner.
What's going to happen now? They can't have given up and called it
a day. A day! What time is it anyhow? About 04.00? Or Only 02.15? They've
had us hooked since 22.53.
But what was that second sound? Complete mystery.
Does the operator still have no new bearings? Herrmann's mouth
looks sewn shut. He's thrust his face out of the sound room but for once 
his eyes are open--his face looks empty, as if he'd died and someone had
neglected to close his eyes.
The Old Man's contemptuous grin has become a trace more human, no
longer quite so deadly. The relaxation in his face is like a laying-on of
hands. Take up your bed and walk! Yes, walk--how about a pleasure stroll
around the ship--on the promenade deck. That would make for an amusing
interlude now. But no one ever considered our need for freedom of
movement; we have no more room than tigers in a traveling cage.
I suddenly see the tiger cage on wheels at Ravenna Beach, that
filthy wagon with iron bars. The giant cats, limp and thirsty in the
blazing midday heat, crowded together in three square feet of shade along
the back wall. On the ground immediately in front of the cage, some
fishermen had laid out dead tuna fish: gleaming steelblue projectiles,
almost as slim as torpedoes. The fat horseflies were already at them.
They go for the eyes first with tuna fish, just as they did with Swoboda.
Accompanying this miserable sight was the tattoo of African drumming, a
sharp, rhythmic staccato that was sent sweeping across the empty
courtyard from a distant corner. The source of the African music was a
dark-brown man in torn overalls who was thrusting thin slabs of ice about
three feet long into a metal box; inside which was a cylinder studded
with spikes, rotating madly. It threw the ice into the air, snapped at
it, threw it into the air again, bit once more. Hurled and crunched and
ground up the slabs of ice to the thud and roll of drums. This barbaric
uproar, the dead tuna fish, the five tigers--tongues hanging out--in
their inferno: that's all I can remember of Ravenna Beach.
Softly, softly the Old Man orders a change of course. The helmsman
presses a button: a dull click. So we're doubling back, or at least
turning a little,
If only we had some idea of what this latest pause means. They
probably want to cradle us into a feeling of security.
But why no more Asdic beams? First two of them, then nothing at
all!
Have we managed to sneak away after all? Or can't the Asdic reach
us at these depths? Are the layers of the water finally protecting us?
In the highly charged silence the Commander whispers, "Pencil and
paper over here."
The navigator is slow to grasp that the request is being made to
him.
"Suppose we might as well get a radio report ready," murmurs the
Old Man.
The navigator is unprepared for this. He reaches awkwardly for a
pad that's lying on the chart table, and his fingers grope for a pencil
with blind uncertainty.
"Take it down," the Commander orders. "Scored hit on eight thousand
GRT and five thousand five hundred GRT--heard to sink--Probable hit on
eight thousand GRT--' Well, go on. Write it down!"
The navigator bends over his table,
The Second Watch Officer turns around, his mouth open with
astonishment.
When the navigator is finished and swivels around again, his face
is as expressionless as ever; it betrays nothing at all. This doesn't
cost him much effort: nature has endowed him with wooden facial muscles.
Nor is there anything to be read in his eyes, they lie so deep in the
shadow of his brows. "After all, that's all they want to know," says the 
Old Man in a low voice. The navigator holds the slip of paper in the air,
arm extended. I approach him on tiptoe and hand the paper on to the
operator, who's meant to preserve it carefully so that it will be ready
in the event we should ever be able to transmit again.
The Old Man's just murmuring to himself, ". . . the last hit . . ."
when the sea is shaken by four explosions.
He shrugs his shoulders, makes a contemptuous gesture, and grumbles
to himself, "Ah well!" And after a while, "Precisely!"
You'd think he was being forced against his will to listen to the
insistent self-justifications of a drunkard. But when the roar ebbs away,
he says not a word; the silence again becomes tense.
The operator reports his figures in a subdued tone, half whispered,
like the formula for an invocation: he's picked up a clear bearing again.
No Asdic noises! I mock myself by thinking, "Our friends have
turned their Asdic off to spare our nerves . . ."
The moon--the fucking moon!
If someone unexpectedly came through the hatch right now, he'd be
astounded to see us standing around like idiots, not uttering a syllable.
Speechless idiots would be the right description. A snatch of laughter
wells up in me; I choke it back. Unexpectedly through the hatch! Some
joke!
"Time?"
"02.30 hours," the Commander is informed by the navigator.
"It's been some time," the Commander acknowledges.
I have no idea what's normal. How long can we keep this up? What's
the state of our oxygen supply? Is the Chief already releasing precious
gas from his cylinders so that we can breathe?
The navigator is holding his stopwatch, following its jerking
second hand as attentively as if our lives depended on his observations.
Has he been keeping a dead-reckoning chart of our dive, all our attempted
evasions? They must make a crazy pattern.
The Old Man is uneasy. How can he trust this quiet? He can't let
his mind wander the way I can. For him there's only the enemy and his
tactics.
"Well?" he drawls expectantly, the word long-drawn-out and
derisive, as he glances theatrically upward. I wonder why he doesn't add,
"Ready, darling?"
He grins at me, head to one side. I try to grin back but feel my
smile stiffen. My cheek muscles harden of their own accord.
"We really got them, didn't we?" he says softly, and stretches
himself comfortably against the periscope housing. You'd think he was
savoring the attack in retrospect. "Amazing, the way the hatches burst.
Sounded really fabulous. The first one must have sunk damn fast."
"Death rattle." Just where did I get that from? Must have been out
of some PR report. That kind of inflated rhetoric couldn't come from
anywhere else: death rattle.
"Dying"--a funny word: everyone seems to avoid it. No one ever
"dies" in obituaries. The Lord takes unto Himself. The dear departed
enters into eternal peace, putting an end to his earthly pilgrimage-- but
there's no dying. The straightforward verb "to die" is avoided like the
plague.
Silence in the boat. Only the soft shifting of the hydroplanes, and
now and then a change of course.
"Propeller sounds getting louder fast," reports the operator.
There's the Asdic again! This time it sounds like someone writing on a
slate with chalk, but pressing much too hard.
"Sounds getting louder."
I notice the sausages hanging from the ceiling. All coated with
white. Isn't doing them any good, the stench and the damp. But salami
will stand a good deal. Certainly still edible. Smoked meat too. Dead
flesh--living flesh. My blood races. My ears respond. Loud beating of my
heart: they've got us!
"Time?"
"02.40 hours!"
A yowling sound! What was that? And was it inside the boat? Or
outside?
A definite bearing! The destroyer with the white bone in her teeth!
Coming at top speed!
The Old Man puts his feet up and unbuttons his vest. He might be
making himself comfortable to tell a joke or two.
I wonder what becomes of sunken boats. Do they just stay there,
crumpled up, a grotesque armada, perpetually suspended at a depth where
the water corresponds precisely to the weight of the collapsed lump of
steel? Or do they go on being compressed until they sink thousands upon
thousands of feet and drop to the bottom? I must ask the Commander
sometime. After all, he's on intimate terms with pressure and
displacement. He must know. Rate of descent, twentyfive miles per hour--I
ought to know too.
The Old Man grins his usual slightly crooked grin. But his eyes
roam watchfully. He gives the helmsman a muttered order: "Hard a-port,
steer two hundred seventy degrees!"
"Destroyer attacking!" the operator reports.
I keep my eyes fixed on the Old Man. Don't look now.
The white bone.. . they're coming for us at top speed!
We're still as deep as we can go.
A moment's suspended animation. Then the operator makes a face. No
doubt about what that means.
The seconds stretch out: the bombs are on their way. Breathe deep,
tense your muscles. A series of shattering blows almost throws me off my
feet.
"Do you mind!" the Old Man exclaims. Someone shouts, "Breach above
the depth gauge!"
"Not so loud," snaps the Commander.
It's the same thing as last time. A weak spot. A jet of water,
stiff as a rod, shoots straight across the control room, dividing the Old
Man's face in two; in one half, his mouth gaping in surprise, in the
other, his raised eyebrows and the deep-curving creases in his forehead.
A shrill whistling and clattering. Incomprehensible shouting back
and forth. My blood seems to be turning to ice. I catch the fluttering
glance of the Bible Scholar.
"I'll fix it!" The control-room mate. He's at the point of the leak
in a single bound.
Suddenly I'm overwhelmed with rage: goddam swine! All we can do is
wait for the bastards to drown us in our own boat like rats.
The control-room mate is dripping. He's turned off some valve or
other. The stream falters and splashes in a curve onto the floor plates.
I notice that the boat has become stern heavy again. The Chief
takes advantage of the next explosion to trim forward, The boat very
slowly returns to an even keel.
That jet of water shooting into the boat under unimaginable
pressure has shaken me to the core; a foretaste of catastrophe. Only
finger-thick, but horrifying enough. Worse than the worst storm wave.
More blows.
Unless I'm totally confused, some of the men have gathered under
the tower hatch. As if there were any point!
It hasn't gotten to the point yet where we have to surface. The Old
Man, sitting there so relaxed, doesn't look at all as though he were at
the end of his tether, But the grin has gone from his face.
The operator whispers, "More propeller sounds at one hundred twenty
degrees."
"Now we're in for it!" the Old Man mutters. There's no doubt about
it.
"What's its present bearing--the second sound?"
His voice has become urgent. Yet more computations to be made in
his head.
A report from astern: "Diesel air valves making water badly!" The
Old Man exchanges a glance with the Chief, who disappears aft. The Old
Man takes over the hydroplaries.
"Forward up ten," I hear him order in a murmur.
I become aware of a strong pressure in my bladder. The sight of the
stream of water must have prompted it. But I don't know where I can
relieve myself.
The Chief reappears in the control room. Aft, there have been two
or three breaks around the flanges. His head seems to have developed a
nervous tic. A leak--and he can't pump: the enemy up there have seen to
that. The auxiliary pump must be kaput anyway. "Glass case of the
auxiliary bilge pump cracked," I hear amid the roaring chaos. The glass
in the water gauge has broken, too. It's madness.
The Old Man orders both motors full ahead again. All our high-speed
evasive maneuvers are doing is reducing the capacity of our batteries.
The Old Man's gambling with our supplies. If we have no more battery
juice, if we run out of compressed air or oxygen, the boat _has_ to
surface. The game will be up--nothing more we can do . . . The Chief has
blown compressed air into the diving cells again and again in order to
give us the buoyancy he could no longer achieve with the bilge pump
alone.
Compressed air has an extremely high market value: Given our
present circumstances, we're in no position to start manufacturing more.
Using the compressor is out of the question.
And how about the oxygen? How long can we go on breathing the
stench that permeates the boat?
The sound man gives one report after another. I too can hear the
Asdic rattle again.
But it's still not really clear whether we have two pursuers now in
place of one.
The Old Man pushes a hand under his cap. He probably doesn't have
much grasp of the situation either. Hydrophone reports give practically
no information about the enemy's intentions.
Or could they in turn be fooling us with their own noises?
Technically it would be possible. Our having to rely completely on the
operator's perceptions is preposterous.
The destroyer seems to be making a wide circle. No further word
about the second series of noises, but this could mean that a second ship
has just been lying there silent for some time.
The pause continues. The First Watch Officer glances round
uncertainly. Crumpled face. Sharp nose, white about the nostrils.
The control-room mate is trying to pee into a big can. He fumbles
about laboriously trying to get his cock out through his leather
trousers.
Then--without warning--a crash. The half-filled can drops from Tinear Willie Isenberg's hand and spills onto the floor plates. The place
instantly stinks of urine. I'm surprised the Old Man doesn't start
cursing.
I breathe very shallowly so as not to encounter the steel band
around my chest, not to inhale too much of the stench. The air is
terrible: the hot smell of diesels running at full speed ... the stink of
fifty men , . . our sweat--the sweat of fear. God knows what else has
gone into this miasma of odors. Now the air smells of shit too. Someone
must have lost control. Sweat and piss and shit and bilge-- unendurable.
I can't help thinking of the poor bastards in the stern. They can't
see the Commander, draw comfort from his presence. They are really caged
in. No one to signal when the infernal din is going to break out again.
I'd rather die than be stuck back there between the reeking, hot engine
blocks.
So it does matter, after all, where one's battle station is. Even
here there are the privileged and the underprivileged.
Hacker and his crew working in the bow compartment at the tubes--no
one tells them our course either. They hear neither the orders to the
helmsman nor the signals to the engine room. They don't know what the
sound man reports. They have no notion which way we're moving--or whether
we're moving at all. It's only when an explosion suddenly hurls the boat
upward or slams it deeper down that they feel it in their stomachs; and
if we go very deep indeed they can hear the telltale "creaking of the
beams."
Three detonations. This time the gigantic sledgehammer came from
below. I catch a glimpse of the depth manometer in the beam of a
flashlight. It jumps backwar'd. I can feel it in the pit of my stomach.
We are being hurled upward in a high-speed elevator.
If the boat is five hundred feet or so down, the pressure waves
from depth charges are supposed to be at their worst if they go off
another hundred feet below that. How deep are we now? Six hundred feet.
There is no flexible steel underneath us. Nothing really to protect
the engines! They are the most vulnerable to explosions from below.
Six more bombs. Again so close under our keel that I can feel the
twisting force in my knee joints. I'm standing on one end of a seesaw
while someone drops blocks of stone on the other end. The needle jerks
backward again. Up and down--just what the Tommies want.
This attack has cost them at least a dozen bombs. There must be a
mass of fish up there, floating on their sides, their air bladders torn
apart. The Tommies could collect them by the netful. Something fresh for
the galley.
I try to take long, regular breaths, For a good five minutes I
breathe deeply, then four bombs explode. All astern. The sound man
reports a decrease in strength.
I concentrate on imagining how one could reproduce all of this,
this entire scene, in papier mâché for the stage. Everything very exact.
Scale one to one. It would be easy: just remove the port wall-- that's
where the audience would sit. No elevated stage. Everything face to face.
Direct view of the hydroplane station. Shift the sky periscope up front
to give the whole thing perspective. I fix in my mind the positions and
attitudes of the actors: the Old Man leaning against the periscope shaft-
-solid, heavy-set, in his ragged sweater, his furlined vest, his saltflecked boots with their thick cork soles, the stubborn tangle of hair
escaping from under his old battered cap with its tarnished trim. Color
of his beard: sauerkraut, slightly rotten sauerkraut.
The hydroplane operators in their rubber jackets--in the heavy
unyielding folds of their foul-weather gear--are two stone blocks that
might have been hewn out of dark basalt and polished.
The Chief in half profile: olive-green shirt with rolled-up
sleeves, crumpled dark olive-green linen trousers. Sneakers. Valentino
hair slicked back. Thin as a whippet. Expressionless as a wax doll. Only
his jaw muscles constantly working. Not a syllable, only the play of the
jaw.
The First Watch Officer has turned his back to the audience. One
senses he doesn't want to be observed because he isn't in complete
control of himself.
Not much of the Second Watch Officer's face to be seen. He's too
heavily muffled up, standing motionless, his eyes darting everywhere, as
if searching for an escape hatch--as if they're trying to get away, to be
free of him, to abandon him, leave him eyeless, while standing rigid by
the periscope.
The navigator keeps his head down and pretends to be checking his
stopwatch.
Only some minor sound effects: a low humming and the occasional
drip of water on the metal plates.
All easy to reproduce. Minutes of silence, complete immobility.
Only the constant hum and the dripping. Just keep everyone standing there
frozen--until the audience becomes uneasy.
Three detonations, no doubt astern.
The navigator apparently has a new method of keeping score. Now he
draws the fifth mark diagonally through the first four. That saves space
and makes it easier to follow. He's already on his sixth row. I can't
remember just how our conscientious scorekeeper tallied the last salvos.
The Old Man goes on calculating uninterruptedly: our course, the
enemy's course, an escape course. With every report from the sound room,
the basic factors in his calculations change.
What's he doing now? Will he have us steer straight ahead? No, this
time he's trying another turn: hard a-port.
Let's hope he's made the right choice, that the Commander of the
destroyer hasn't decided on port too--or on starboard, should he be
steering toward us. That's the way it is: I don't even know whether the
destroyer is attacking from forward or astern.
The figures that the operator is calling out are becoming jumbled
in my head.
"Dropping cans!" The operator has heard the splash of more bombs
hitting the surface of the water.
I hold tight.
"Man the bilge pump," the Old Man orders, enunciating with great
care although the explosion hasn't yet come.
The noise! But it doesn't seem to bother the Old Man.
A whirlpool of detonations.
"Saturation pattern!" he says.
If it doesn't work with single charges or with series of them, they
simply lay down a carpet.
_Unshrinkable!_
With half my mind I ask myself where I dug up the English word
"unshrinkable." Finally I see it machine-stitched, in gold thread, on the
label of my swimming trunks, under the words "pure wool."
A carpet! A spool begins unwinding in my head: hand-knotted,
exquisite Afghan design--flying carpet--Harun al Rashid--Oriental
bulishit!
"Much too good for us!" sneers the Old Man. In the worst of the
noise he orders the speed increased. "Now they're reloading!"
Contemptuously, he explains the absence of new detonations. "The more you
use, the more you lose."
A golden maxim, like something straight out of the messroom
calendar. The quintessential lesson of a dozen depth-charge attacks: "The
more you use, the more you lose."
The Commander orders us up. What does that mean? Are we going to
surface? Is the next order to be: "Prepare escape gear!"?
_Atlantic Killer_--a title for a film. Show a hairline crack in an
egg. That's all it would take on our eggshell--just one crack. The enemy
can leave the sea to do the rest.
The efforts we used to make to get rid of garden snails. The black
shiny giants, the night snails, we would collect in buckets to be emptied
into toilets and flushed away. Drowned in the cesspool-- that did the
job. Stepping on them is as disgusting as chopping them up. An explosion
of green slime.
As children we played the cremation game. Away with the hearth
fender, little pails of rainworms dumped onto the red coals--and in a
second the worms were transformed with a loud hiss into twists of black
ash.
Rabbits. You hold them firmly with your left hand and give them a
blow on the back of the neck. Neat and clean: only a little twitching--as
though electrocuted. Carp you hold with your left hand sideways on the
board and give them a heavy blow on the snout with a stick. It makes a
crunching sound. Quickly slit open their stomachs. Careful with the gall
bladder, the gall mustn't spill out. The swollen air bladders gleam like
Christmas tree ornaments. Funny thing about carp: even when they're cut
in two there's still life in them. It used to frighten us as children
when the halves went on jerking for hours on end.
I could never bring myself to kill doves, even though it's easy to
do. You simply tear their heads off. Clamp them between index and middle
fingers--a small twisting motion and crack and away! Roosters and hens
you hold high on the wings with your left hand, directly under the
shoulder blades, as it were. And then quickly press them sideways on the
block and guillotine them with the ax. Let them bleed, but be sure to
keep a firm hold, or they'll fly away without their heads. A bloody mess.
New sounds: propeller noises--a high whistling, audible throughout
the boat. I see the new control-room assistant trembling all over. He's
slumped down over the water distributor. Someone else--who is it?--sits
down on the floor plates. Doubled up, a dark lump of flesh and fear. The
others are huddled in a variety of postures, making themselves as small
as possible. As though hiding would do any good now.
Only the Old Man sits in his usual way, casual and relaxed.
A new detonation! My left shoulder hits something so hard that I
nearly cry out.
Two more.
"Start pumping!" the Old Man orders above the roar. We can't lose
the destroyer. Damnation, we can't shake her off!
The Chief stares glassily out of the corners of his eyes. He looks
as if he can hardly wait for the next series of bombs. Pei'verse: he
_wants_ to bail, and to do that he needs the bombs.
The boat can no longer be held without continuous bailing. Bilge
pump on when there's roaring outside, bilge pump off when it stops. Again
and again--on and off--on and off.
Waiting--waiting--waiting.
Still nothing? Nothing at all? I open my eyes but keep them firmly
fixed on the floor plates.
A double blow. Pain in the back of my neck. What was that? Cries--
the floor shudders--the floor plates jump--the whole boat vibrates--the
steel howls like a dog. The lights have gone again. Who cried out?
"Permission to blow tanks?" I hear the Chief's voice as though
through wool.
"No!"
The beam of the Chief's pocket flashlight wavers over the
Commander's face. No mouth. No eyes.
Tearing, shrieking, shrill screaming--then more shattering blows.
The orgy of noise has hardly ebbed when the chirp of the Asdic is back
again. In our deep-sea aviary, the chirp that rings of betrayal. Rasps
the nerves more than anything else. They couldn't have come up with a
worse sound to torment us. Like our own Stuka's siren scream. I hold my
breath,
Three o'clock plus how many minutes? I can't quite make out the big
hand.
Reports. Fragments of words both from forward and aft. What is
leaking badly? A drive-shaft gasket? Of course, I understand, both shafts
go through the pressure hull.
The emergency lights go on. In the half-darkness I see that the
control room is full of men. What now? What is happening? Which men are
these? They must have come in through the after hatch. I've been sitting
in the forward one. They couldn't have got through _here_. Damn this dim
light. I can't recognize any of them. Two men--the control-room mate and
one of the assistants--half block my view. They're standing as stiff as
ever, but everything behind them is in motion. I hear the scuffling of
boots, panting breath, sharp snorts, a few mumbled curses.
The Old Man hasn't noticed yet. He keeps his eyes on the depth
manometer. Only the navigator turns his head.
"Breach in the diesel room," someone shouts from the stern.
"Propaganda!" says the Old Man without even turning around, and
then once more with deliberate clarity, "Prop-a-gan-da!"
The Chief starts in the direction of the diesel room but stops
short and looks at the manometer.
"I demand a report!" snaps the Commander, turning away from the
manometers and seeing the crowd in the semi-darkness around the after
hatch.
As though by reflex he draws his head in and bends forward
slightly. "Chief, just give me your light," he orders in a whisper.
There's a stir among the men who have come into the control room
from astern. They shrink back like tigers in front of their trainer. One
of them even succeeds in raising his leg behind him and groping his way
back through the hatch. It looks like a circus act. The flashlight in the
Commander's hand catches only the receding back of a man hastening
through the hatch toward the stern, rescue kit under his arm.
The face of the control-room mate is close to mine. His mouth a
dark hole. His eyes wide--I can see the full circle of his pupils. He
seems to be screaming but there is no sound.
Have my powers of perception gone mad? I don't see the controlroom
mate as frightened, but as an actor imitating the fear of a control-room
mate.
The Commander orders both motors half speed ahead.
"Half speed ahead both!" comes the voice of the helmsman from the
tower.
The control-room mate seems to be coming out of his coma. He begins
to glance around furtively but won't look anyone straight in the face.
His right foot feels its way cautiously over the floor plates. His tongue
moistens his gray lower lip.
In a soft voice the Old Man sneers, "Wasting their tin cans . . ."
The navigator has come to a dead stop, his hand holding its piece
of chalk. He looks frozen in mid-movement, but it's only hesitation. He
doesn't know how many marks to jot down for the last attack. His
bookkeeping could get scrambled. One error--and the whole thing would be
down the drain.
He blinks as if to shrug off a dream, then makes five bold strokes.
Four straight up and down, and one through the middle.
The next explosions come singly--sharp, ripping bursts but with
little after-roar. The Chief has to shut down the pumps quickly. The
navigator starts on the next group of chalk marks. As he is drawing the
last one, the chalk falls from his hand.
Another great blast. Once more, a rattling over badly laid rails.
Rumbling across switches, then bumping through broken stone. Metal
screams and shrills.
If a rivet should give way now, it could--as I well know--plow
straight through my skull like a bullet. The pressure! A stream of water
breaking into the boat could saw a man in half.
The sour smell of fear! Now they've got us in the wringer, by the
short hairs. We've had it. _It's our turn now_.
"Sixty degrees--getting stronger--more sounds at two hundred
degrees!" Two, then four explosions in my head. They're going to rip open
our hatches, the filthy swine!
Groans and hysterical sobbing.
The boat is jouncing like an airplane in a pocket of turbulence.
They're carpeting us.
The impact has knocked two men down. I see a mouth shrieking,
flailing feet, two faces masked in terror.
Two more explosions. The sea is a single raging mass.
Subsiding roar and then suddenly silence. Only essential sounds:
the sonorous insect hum of the motors, men breathing, the steady drip of
water.
"Forward up ten," whispers the Chief.
The whine of the hydroplane motors pierces me to the bone. Must
_everything_ make so much noise?
Isn't the Old Man going to change course? Aren't we going to turn
again? Or will he try to break out of the circling pattern by steering
straight ahead?
Why doesn't the sound man say something?
If he has nothing to report, it can only mean that there are no
engines running on the surface. But the bastards can't have gone so
quickly that he didn't catch them at it. So they're lying there doggo.
We've seen that happen a couple of times before. Still, the noise of the
destroyer's engines has never been absent this long. . . .
The Old Man maintains depth and course.
Five minutes pass, then the operator's eyes suddenly open wide, and
he turns his hand wheel furiously. His forehead is deeply furrowed.
They're about to attack again. I no longer listen to his reports but try
to concentrate on nothing but keeping my seat. A sharp double crack.
"Boat making water!" A cry comes from astern in the roar following
the explosion.
"Express yourself properly," the Commander orders the invisible man
in a hiss.
Making water! This miserable naval jargon! Sounds like
manufacturing something: "creating" it, and yet making water is about the
worst thing that can happen in our situation.
The next one seems to hit me below the belt. Don't scream! I clench
my teeth until my jaws ache. Someone else cries out for me, in a falsetto
that goes right through me. The beam of a flashlight sweeps around in
search of the man who screamed. I hear a new noise; the chattering of
teeth like the quick rattle of castanets, then sniffling, snorting. There
are men sobbing too.
A body lands against my knee and almost knocks me over. I feel
someone hauling himself up, seizing me by the leg. But the first man, the
one who fell against my knee, seems to be staying flat on the floor
plates.
The emergency light over the navigator's table has not gone on
again. The darkness provides a cover under which panic can secretly
spread.
More racking sobs. They come from someone crouching on the water
distributor. I can't see who he is. The control-room mate is suddenly
there, giving him such a blow on the back that he cries out.
The Old Man swings around as though bitten by a tarantula and snaps
in the direction of the water distributor, "Report to me when this is
over!"
Who? The control-room mate? The man he hit?
When the light improves I see the new control-room assistant is
silently weeping.
The Old Man orders half speed.
"Half speed ahead both!" the helmsman acknowledges.
This means that the boat's buoyancy can no longer be maintained at
slow speed. Too much water has seeped in astern.
The propeller noises can be heard more clearly than ever. A roaring
rhythmic beat. As counterpoint, the sound of a milk cooler, and over that
a whirring egg beater and the buzz of a drill. Full speed!
The needle of the depth manometer moves a few marks further. The
boat is slowly sinking. The Chief can no longer stop it--blowing the
tanks would make far too much noise and pumping is out of the question.
"One hundred ninety degrees!" the operator reports. "One hundred
seventy degrees!"
"Steer sixty degrees!" orders the Commander and pushes home the
tight-drawn steel cable of the sky periscope. "Let's hope we're not
leaving an oil slick," he remarks as if by accident. Oil slick! The words
flash through the room, echo in my mind, and at once leave iridescent
streaks on my closed eyelids. If oil is rising from the boat, the enemy
has as good a target as he could possibly wish for.
The Commander bites his lower lip.
It's dark up there, but oil smells even in the dark--for miles.
There's a whisper from the sound room. "Destroyer sounds very
close!"
The Commander whispers back, "Slow ahead both--minimum
hydroplanes!"
He takes off his cap and lays it beside him on the chart chest. A
sign of resignation? Have we reached the end?
The operator leans way out of his compartment as though about to
make a report. But his mouth remains shut. His face is rigid with
tension. Suddenly he takes his earphones off. I know what that means:
noises everywhere, so there's no longer any point in trying to determine
where they're coming from.
Now I can hear them myself.
A crashing, exploding roar, as though the sea itself were
collapsing. Finished! Darkness!
"Are there ever to be any proper reports?" I hear an unrecognizable
voice say before I open my eyes again.
The boat is becoming perceptibly stern heavy. In the beam of a
flashlight the telephone cable and some oilskins swing out from the wall.
A few more heartbeats, then a voice penetrates the stillness.
"Motor room--shipping water!" Immediately followed by more reports: "Bow
compartment flanges holding--diesel room flanges holding fast." Finally
the emergency light. The needle of the depth manometer moves with
terrifying speed over the dial.
"Full ahead both!" the Old Man orders, Despite the desperation
implicit in this command, his voice is matter of fact and calm.
The boat lunges forward: the batteries have connected up, one after
the other.
"Forward hydroplane full up! Aft full down!" the Chief orders the
operators. But the indicator doesn't move. It's frozen.
"Aft hydroplane out of action," reports the control-room mate.
Ashen-faced, he turns toward the Commander with a look of complete trust.
"Recouple for manual," the Chief orders, so calmly that we might as
well be on maneuvers. The hydroplane operators rise and throw their
entire weight against the hand wheels. The white needle of the indicator
suddenly trembles--thank god, it's moving! The mechanism isn't damaged
and the hydroplane isn't jammed; only the electrical control has failed.
The loud humming of the motors. Full speed--that's insanity! But
what else is left for us to try? Running silently, we can no longer hold 
our present level, The motor room is making water--an inrush of water at
our most vulnerable point.
"Both E-motors falling below full power!"
The Old Man reflects no more than a second, then commands, "Examine
both batteries! Test the accumulator bilges for acid!" No doubt about it:
some of the battery cells must have cracked and run dry. What next? What
more can happen?
My heart almost stops as the First Watch Officer moves to one side,
revealing the depth manometer. The needle is still moving slowly forward.
The boat is sinking, even though the motors are running on all the power
still available.
It's only seconds before there is a sharp hissing sound, The
control-room mate has released the compressed air. Our buoyancy tanks are
filling.
"Blow them full!"
The Chief has sprung to his feet. He's breathing in short gasps.
His voice vibrates. "Trim forward! Move, move!"
I don't dare stand up for fear my legs will fail me. My muscles are
like jelly, my nerves are quivering. Let the final blow fall! Give up!
Call it a day! This is unendurable!
I realize that I'm slipping into dazed indifference. Nothing
matters. Just get it over with--one way or another. I summon up all my
strength to pull myself together.
Damn it all, don't let go.
We have risen 175 feet. The indicator comes to a halt. The
Commander orders, "Open exhaust three!"
Terror wells up in me. I know what this order means. A surge of air
is now rising toward the surface and forming a bubble that will betray
our position. A torrent of fear. To ward it off, I murmur, "Immune!
Immune!"
My heart keeps pounding! My breath comes in gasps. I hear a muffled
command: "Shut off the exhaust!"
The navigator turns his head to the Old Man. I can see his full
face: a wood carving. Pale, polished linden wood. He sees me and thrusts
out his lower lip.
"Hysterical women," growls the Old Man.
If the E-motors aft are swamped, if there should be a short circuit
. . . how could the screws turn? Without propellers and hydroplanes both
working, we're done for.
The Commander impatiently demands reports from the motor room.
I catch only fragments: ". . . made watertight with wooden wedges--
sole-plate broken--lots of water, cause unknown."
I hear a high whimpering sound. Seconds pass before I realize that
it's not coming from the enemy. It's coming from somewhere forward. A
high undulating wail.
The Old Man turns a disgusted face in that direction. He looks as
if he might explode with rage at any moment.
"One hundred fifty degrees--getting louder!"
"And the other--the first one?"
"Ninety degrees; sixty degrees; holding steady!"
Christ, now the fuckers have got together. They're tossing the ball
back and forth, and the ball is the Asdic bearing. Our original pursuer
is no longer acting under any handicap. While he's attacking at top 
speed--which puts his own Asdic out of action--his colleague can idle
along, taking bearings for him. And then radio the figures to him.
The Old Man's face is contorted, as though he had taken too long to
swallow an especially bitter pill. "This is a crime!"
For the first time, the sound man shows signs of nervousness. Or
does he _have_ to turn his wheel so violently to find out which of the
two sounds is getting louder?
If the second Commander up there is an old hand, if the two of them
have worked together before, they'll exchange roles as often as possible
in order to outfox us.
Unless I'm completely mistaken, the Old Man is steering toward the
enemy in a tight curve.
Rollercoaster! The thought keeps coming back. Rollercoaster. Up,
down, gliding, rising and falling curves, looping back on ourselves,
sudden dives and jarring ascents.
Two crashes shake the bOat. Four, five more follow, Two of them
from underneath. Only a couple of seconds, and the face of the chief
mechanic Franz appears in the frame of the after hatch, completely
distorted in terror.
He emits a sort of cackling high-pitched "hee hee hee," which
sounds like a bad imitation of the destroyer's screws. The Commander, who
has closed his eyes again, turns toward him. Meanwhile the mechanic has
climbed through the frame of the hatch and stands, escape apparatus in
hand, half crouched behind the periscope shaft in the control room. He
bares his teeth, looking like a monkey. They gleam brightly out of his
dark beard. A spasmodic sobbing now compounds the "bee bee hee."
How does he do it? Then I realize that the sobbing is coming from
another corner.
The Old Man stiffens. For a fraction of a second he sits rigidly
upright. Then he draws his head in again and turns around slowly. He sees
the chief mechanic. Seconds pass and then he snarls, "Are you crazy? Back
to your battle station! At once!"
According to regulations the chief mechanic should say, "Jawohl,
Herr Kaleun!" But he simply opens his mouth wide as if he were at the
point of screaming hysteria.
Loss of hearing, I think to myself: He's shouting and I can't hear
a thing. But my ears are working! I can hear the Old Man spit out,
"Goddammit, pull yourself together!"
He's on his feet.
The sobbing stops.
"Destroyer bearing one hundred twenty degrees," reports the
operator. The Old Man blinks irritably.
The chief mechanic starts to writhe in a wordless struggle--as if
under the spell of a hypnotist. I can see the spasm begin to pass. If
only he doesn't collapse!
"Return to battle station at once!" and immediately thereafter, in
a threatening undertone, "At once, I said!"
"One hundred ten degrees. Getting louder!" The operator's
whispering voice sounds like the monotone of a priest.
The Old Man hunches his head down even farther, then relaxes again
and moves two or three steps forward. I get up to make room for him.
Where does he mean to go?
The chief mechanic finally pulls himself together with a jerk and
gasps out, "_Jawohl_, Herr Kaleun!"
Then he throws a lightning glance around him, bends over double,
and disappears through the after hatch without the Old Man seeing him.
The Commander, who is just on the point of putting his left leg
through the forward hatch frame, stops and looks back with an odd
expression on his face.
"Herr Kaleun, he's gone," stammers the Chief.
The Commander withdraws his leg. It looks as if a film were
suddenly being run backwards. Like a slightly dazed boxer whose vision
had been blurred for a minute or two, the Commander walks stiffly and
silently back to his place.
"I'd have finished him off!"
The pistol in his cubbyhole!
"Starboard full rudder! Steer two hundred thirty degrees!" he says
in his normal voice. "Take her down one hundred seventy-five feet,
Chief!" The operator reports, "Propeller sounds bearing ten degrees."
"Acknowledged!" says the Old Man.
The Asdic beams rattle and rasp along the boat.
"Revolting," he whispers.
Everyone in the control room knows that it's not the Asdic he's
referring to but the chief mechanic. "Franz of all people! Disgraceful!"
He shakes his head in disgust, as though he'd seen a sexual
exhibitionist. "Lock him up. I'll have him locked up!"
"Destroyer attacking," reports the operator in a drone.
"Steer two hundred degrees. Both motors slow ahead!"
The Old Man is up to his tricks again: dodging aside into the
underbrush. How many times does this make?
Through the forward hatch drifts a sour smell. Some of the men must
have vomited.
The operator starts squinting again. Whenever he makes this face I
turn my head away and hunch up my shoulders.
A tattoo on the boat, then an immense blow, and soon the infernal
resounding gurgle and roar of the water, like a mighty rolling echo.
Five thunderclaps punctuate the echo. A matter of seconds.
Everything that is lying around loose comes sliding and rolling toward
the stern. The Chief has increased speed during the detonations and in
the ensuing roar he shouts, "Pump!" He remains behind the hydroplane
operators, crouched as if to leap.
The thundering and roaring goes on and on, We crash through a
raging waterfall. The bilge pumps work throughout the noise.
Before the Chief can shut them off, three more explosions shake the
boat.
"Continue bailing!" The Chief sucks in his breath, throws a quick
look at the Commander. Could there be a touch of satisfaction in it? Can
he actually be feeling _proud_ because his bilge pumps are still
functioning?
"They're doing their best for you, Chief," says the Old Man.
"Superb service!"
04.00. Our attempts to break away have lasted--how many hours? I've
lost count. Most of the men in the control room are sitting down: elbows
on knees, heads in their hands. No one even looks up any longer. The
Second Watch Officer is staring at the floor as if he could see mushrooms
growing out of the floor plates. The graduated circle of the sky
periscope has been torn loose and dangles on a wire. There is the tinkle
of falling glass.
But wonders never cease!--The boat remains watertight. We're still
moving, still buoyant. The motors are running, our screws turning. We're
making headway, and we still have power for the rudder. The Chief can
hold the boat: it's actually on an even keel again.
The navigator is bent over the chart table as though he is
fascinated by it; his head is close to it, and the points of the
dividers-- which are clasped in his right hand--have bored into the
linoleum.
The control-room mate has stuck two fingers into his mouth,
apparently about to whistle on them.
The Second Watch Officer is trying to imitate the Commander's
equanimity. But his fists betray him: they're firmly clenched around his
binoculars--he still has the glasses hanging around his neck-- and he's
flexing them very slowly at the wrists, first one way, then the other.
His knuckles are white with strain.
The Commander turns to the operator, who has his eyes closed and is
twisting the wheel of his apparatus from side to side. Having apparently
singled out the sound he was looking for, his maneuverings taper off
almost to nothing.
In a subdued voice he announces, "Destroyer noises receding at one
hundred twenty degrees!"
"They think they've finished us off!" says the Commander. That's
the last of one of them--but what about the other?
The Chief is in the stern, so the Commander himself is still in
charge of the hydroplanes.
The whining has ceased. All that comes from the bow compartment is
an occasional spasmodic sobbing.
The Chief reappears, his hands and forearms black with oil.
Snatches of his half-whispered report reach me. "Flange of outer gas
vent. . . condenser. . . two foundation bolts broken. . . already
replaced . . . firmly wedged with wooden pegs . . . flange still leaking-
-but it's minor."
Beside the Commander's desk lies a carton of syrup, mashed and
trodden all over the floor. The accordion is spread open in this
disgusting mess. All the pictures have fallen off the walls. I take a
cautious step over the face of the C-in-C.
In the Officers' Mess, books lie strewn among towels and spilled
bottles of apple juice. The silly straw dog with glass eyes that's
supposed to be our mascot has landed on the floor too. This is where I
probably ought to start cleaning up--do something to occupy my hands. I
bend over; stiff joints; I go down on my knees. Christ! I can actually
move my hands. I'm making myself useful! Quietly, quietly, be careful,
Don't hit anything. It must be way past four o'clock.
I've been cleaning up for a good ten minutes when the Chief comes
through: greenish rings under his eyes. Pupils dark as lumps of coal,
cheeks sunken. He's at the end of his tether.
I hand him a bottle of fruit juice. It's not just his hand; his
whole body is trembling. He perches on a ledge while he's drinking. But
as he puts the bottle down he's already on his feet, staggering slightly
like a boxer, badly shaken and completely exhausted, but pulling himself
up out of his corner one more time. ". . . It won't work," he mutters as
he disappears.
Suddenly there are three more explosions, but this time they sound
like beats on a slack drumskin. "Miles away," I hear the navigator say.
"Two hundred seventy degrees--moving away slowly!" the operator
reports.
To think that somewhere there is dry land, hills and valleys . . .
people are still asleep in their houses. In Europe, that is, In America
they're still sitting up with the lights burning, and we're probably
closer to America than we are to France. We've come too far west.
Absolute silence in the boat. After a while the operator whispers,
"Destroyer bearing two hundred sixty degrees. Very faint, Slow revs--
seems to be moving away."
"They're running silent," says the Commander. "Dawdling as slow as
they can. And listening! Where in hell's the second one? Watch it!"
This is addressed to the hydrophone operator. So the Old Man no
longer knows precisely where the enemy is.
I can hear the chronometer ticking and the condensation dripping
into the bilge. The operator does a full sweep--and another, and another-
-but gets no bearing in his instrument.
"I don't like it," the Commander mutters to himself. "Don't like it
at all."
A trick! It has to be. Something's wrong: it sticks out a mile.
The Old Man stares straight ahead, expressionless, then blinks
quickly once or twice and swallows hard. Apparently he can't decide on a
course of action.
If I only knew what the game was. No more explosions--no more
Asdic--the Commander's continued play-acting--what to make of it?
If only I could ask the Old Man straight out, in four plain words,
"How do things stand?"
But my mouth seems to be riveted shut, I'm incapable of thought.
Head's a volcanic crater, bubbling evilly.
I feel thirsty. There must still be some apple juice left in the
locker. I open it carefully, but shai'ds of china fall out. All that damn
banging around. Most of the cups and saucers are broken. A coffee pot has
lost its spout. Looks idiotic without it. Fortunately the bottle of apple
juice is intact. Apparently it was what smashed everything else. Quite
right too: Smash everything around you so as to stay whole yourself.
The framed photograph of our launching is still lying under the
table, broken. Sharp slivers of glass still sticking in the frame. I must
have missed it while I was cleaning up. I manage to get hold of it but
can't be bothered to loosen the glass daggers, so it goes back on its
hook just as it is.
"No more noises?" asks the Commander.
"No, Herr Kaleun!"
Slowly it gets to be 05.00.
No noise. Hard to understand. Have they really given up the chase?
Or are they considering us as sunk already?
I feel my way back into the control room. The Commander is
consulting in whispers with the navigator. I hear, "In twenty minutes we
surface!"
I hear it, but I can't believe my ears. Do we have to surface? Or
are we really safely out of the shit?
The operator starts to say something; he's about to make a report--
but he stops in mid-syllable and keeps turning his wheel. He must have
caught a faint sound, which he's now trying to track by fine-tuning his
apparatus.
The Old Man stares into the operator's face. The operator moistens
his lower lip with his tongue. In a very iow voice he reports, "Noise
bearing sixty degrees--very faint."
Abruptly the Old Man climbs through the hatch and crouches down
beside him in the gangway. The operator passes him the headset. The Old
Man listens and the operator turns his wheel very gently back and forth
along the scale, and gradually the Old Man's face grows stern.
Minutes pass. The Old Man remains tied to the hydrophone by the
cord of the headset. He looks like a fish on a line. His orders to the
helmsman are to bring the bow around so that he can hear better.
"Stand by to surface!"
His voice, grating and determined, has startled others than myself.
The Chief's eyelids twitch.
Stand by to surface! He must know what is and isn't possible!
Noises still audible in the hydrophone and he's getting ready to go up?
The hydroplane operators sit hunched over their tables. The
navigator has finally taken off his sou'wester. His mask-like face looks
years older, the lines in it carved even deeper.
The Chief stands behind him, his left thigh resting on the chart
chest, his right hand on the pillar of the sky periscope, his torso bent
forward as though to bring him as close as possible to the needle of the
depth manometer that is slowly moving backward over the scale. With every
mark it passes we are three feet closer to the surface. It moves very
slowly, as if to give us time to experience these minutes at leisure.
"Radio clear by now?" asks the Commander.
"_Jawohl_, Herr Kaleun!"
The watch is already assembled in oilskins and sou'westers under
the tower hatch, Binoculars are being polished--much too vigorously, or
so it seems. No one says a word.
My breathing has steadied. I've regained the use of my muscles. I
can stand without being afraid of staggering, but at the same time I can
single out every muscle, every bone in my body. The flesh on my face
feels frozen.
The Old Man intends to surface. We're going to breathe sea air
again. We are alive. The bastards didn't kill us.
No sudden outbursts of joy. I'm still in the grip of terror,
Letting our tense shoulders droop, holding our heads a little higher--
that's about all we can manage.
The crew is completely exhausted. Even after the order to surface
has been given, both control-room assistants sit apathetically on the
flooding and bailing distributors. And as for the control-room mate, he's
trying to look casual, but I can still see the horror in his face.
I suddenly long for a periscope ten times the length of this one.
If only the Old Man could take a single quick look around from the safety
of our present position, so that we would know what's going on up there--
what that damn bunch is really up to!
The boat has risen to periscope depth. We're close to the surface.
The Chief has the boat firmly in hand. No trace of excessive buoyancy.
The Old Man sticks the asparagus stalk out. I hear the periscope
motor spring into action and stop again, and then the soft snap and click
of the clutch. The Old Man is riding his merry-go-round.
The tension in the room is almost unbearable. Without intending to,
I hold my breath until I have to gasp for air like a drowning man. No
word from above.
So things do look bad! If it were all clear, the Old Man would tell
us at once.
"Take this down!"
Thank god, the Old Man's voice.
The navigator thinks the words are for him. He reaches for a
pencil. My god, are we going to have this all over again? Literary
composition for the war log?
"Here we go: 'Periscope reveals--destroyer, corrected bearing one
hundred degrees, lying motionless--range about sixty-five hundred yards.'
Got that?"
"_Jawohl_, Herr Kaleun!"
"'Moon still very bright.' Got that?"
"_Jawohl_, Herr Kaleun!"
"'Remaining submerged.'" So that's that!
No further word from above.
Three or four minutes pass, then the Commander gropes his way down.
"Thought they could fool us! Same old tricks! Idiots! Every time they
think we'll bite. Chief, take her down to two hundred feet again! We'll
just move a little to one side and reload the torpedoes in our own good
time."
The Old Man is behaving as if everything were going according to
plan. I want to grasp my head in my hands: he sounds as if he's reading
some boring company report from the business section of a newspaper.
"Navigator, take this down: 'Running silent to get clear of destroyer.
Presume that destroyer--that destroyer has lost us. . . No sound in
immediate vicinity."
"Presume" is good! So he doesn't even know for sure. He narrows his
eyes. Apparently he's not yet through with his dictation.
"Navigator!"
"_Jawohl_, Herr Kaleun!"
"Add this. 'Conflagration--brilliant conflagration, corrected
bearing two hundred fifty degrees. Assume it to be tanker hit by us." The
Old Man gives an order to the helmsman. "Steer two hundred fifty
degrees!"
I stare around from one to another and see nothing but impassive
faces. Only the Second Watch Officer betrays a slight frown. The First
Watch Officer is gazing expressionlessly into space. The navigator is
writing at the chart table.
Aft, and in the bow compartment, they're making repairs. Now and
then a man comes through the control room with oil-smeared hands and
reports to the First Watch Officer, who has taken charge of the
hydroplanes. They always do it in a whisper. No one apart from the Old
Man dares use his normal voice.
"Another half hour and we'll reload the torpedoes," he says, and
then to me, "This would be a good time for a drink."
He makes no move to leave the control room, so I hurriedly go in
search of a bottle of apple juice. I don't seem to want to move. Every
muscle aches as I clamber through the hatch. Limping past Herrmann, I see
that he's totally intent on his hydrophone wheel. But right now I don't
give a damn what he picks up with it.
Whatever the report was, after half an hour the Old Man gives the
order to reload the torpedoes.
They're working like madmen in the bow compartment. Wet clothes,
sweaters, leather suits, and all kinds of junk are piled up close to the
hatch, and the floor boards are gone.
"Praise the Lord with trumpets and cymbals," intones the torpedo
mechanic Hacker. "Finally we'll get some room in here," he adds for my
benefit, wiping the sweat from his neck with a filthy rag of a towel. He
urges his coolies on. "Get with it, boys, get with it--up with the
hoists!"
"A smear of Vaseline and straight into the crack!" Ario hangs
suspended from the chains of the hoist in mock ecstasy, as he hauls away
in time to Hacker's calls of hau-ruck. "Fuck me--fuck me-- you horny
goat, oh, oh, oh, you bastard--oh, you--that's it--deeper--go on! More--
more!"
I'm amazed that he can find the breath for it in this madhouse. A
seaman who's also hauling away at the tackle, has an embittered
expression on his face. He's pretending to be deaf.
When the first torpedo is in its tube, the Berliner spreads his
legs and dries the sweat from his torso with a hand towel, then hands the
dirty rag to Ario.
The First Watch Officer appears to check the time. The men work on
doggedly. Aside from Hacker's hau-rucks and subdued curses there's
nothing to be heard.
Back in the Officers' Mess I see the Old Man in his usual corner of
the Chief's bunk, legs stretched out in front of him, leaning back at an
angle like a man at the end of a very long train ride. His face is
upturned, his mouth half open. A thread of saliva dangles from one
corner, disappearing into his beard.
I wonder what to do. He can't just lie here like this, with people
coming and going. I cough loudly, as if to clear a frog in my throat--and
instantly the Old Man is wide awake, sitting up straight again. But he
says nothing, just gestures toward a seat.
Finally he asks haltingly, "How do things look forward?"
"One fish is already in its tube. They're just about finished! The
men, I mean--not the work."
"Huh. And have you been aft?"
"No--too much work going on."
"Tsch, it looks pretty shitty back there. But the Chief will
manage; he's a helluva dancing master." Then he calls into the gangway,
"Food! For the officers of the watch as well." And to me, "Never pass up
the chance for a celebration--even if it's only with a piece of bread and
a sour pickle!"
Plates and knives and forks are brought in. Soon we're sitting
around a properly set table.
I'm blabbering away silently to myself like an idiot. "Crazy--
absolutely crazy." There in front of my eyes are a smooth clean table,
plates, knives, forks, cups, the familiar lamplight. I stare at the Old
Man stirring his tea with a polished spoon, the First Watch Officer
dissecting a sausage, the Second Watch Officer splitting a spiced pickle
lengthwise.
The steward asks me whether I want more tea. "Me? Tea? Yes!" I
stammer. A hundred depth charges are still exploding in my head. Every
muscle aches from the desperate tension. I have a cramp in my right
thigh; I can even feel my jaw muscles at every bite. That comes from
grinding my teeth.
"Why are you goggling like that?" the Commander asks, his mouth
full, and I hastily spear a slice of sausage on my fork. Keep your eyes
open. Don't begin to think. Chew, chew thoroughly, the way you usually
do. Move your eyes. Blink.
"Another pickle?" asks the Old Man.
"Yes, please--thanks!"
From the gangway comes a dull thumping. Is Hinrich, who has
relieved Herrmann in the sound room, trying to call attention to himself?
A loud stamping of boots, then he announces, "Exploding depth charges,
bearing two hundred thirty degrees."
His voice sounds much higher than Herrmann's, a tenor as opposed to
a bass.
I try to relate his report to our course. Two points to port.
"Well, it's about time we surfaced," says the Old Man, his mouth
full. "Ship's time?"
"06.55 hours!" is the report from the navigator in the control
room.
The Old Man gets up, still chewing, stands there while he washes
down his mouthful with a great gulp of tea, and reaches the end of
gangway in three determined strides. "We surface in ten minutes. Add a
note to the log: 'o6.oo, torpedoes reloaded. 06.55, depth charge
detonations at two hundred thirty degrees.'"
Then he comes back and wedges himself into his corner again.
Hacker appears, gasping for air. He has to take a couple of deep
breaths before he can get a word out. My god, look at him! The sweat is
pouring down him in rivulets. He can hardly stay on his feet as he
stammers out his report. "Four bow torpedoes loaded. Stern tube . . ."
He tries to go on, but the Old Man interrupts him. "Very good,
Hacker; it's obvious we can't reach it for the time being."
Hacker tries to do a snappy about-face, but loses his balance. He's
just able to save himself from falling by clutching the top of the
lockers.
"These youngsters!" says the Old Man. "They really are amazing!"
And then, "It certainly feels different having torpedoes in the tubes
again!"
I know that all he wants to do now is attack the destroyer that's
been tormenting us. He'd be betting everything on a single card again,
but no doubt he has something else in mind .
He gets up resolutely, does up three buttons on his fur-lined vest,
jams his cap down harder on his head, and heads for the control room.
The Chief appears and announces that the damages aft have been
repaired with shipboard materials. Shipboard materials--that means only
temporary repairs.
I climb into the control room behind the Old Man,
The bridge watch is already standing by. The Second Engineer has
stationed himself behind the hydroplane operators. The boat is rising
rapidly. We'll soon be at periscope level.
Without wasting a word the Old Man climbs into the tower. The
periscope motor begins to run. More clicks and pauses. I have difficulty
breathing again until his voice comes down loud and clear. "Surface."
The equalization of pressure is like a blow. I want to roar and
gulp all at once, instead of which I simply stand there like all the
others. Only my lungs are in action, pumping in the fresh sea air. Down
comes the voice of the Commander, "Both diesels!"
Astern in the diesel room the compressed air rushes into the
cylinders. The pistons begin to move up and down. And now the ignition!
The diesels fire. A shudder runs through the boat as violent as the first
jerk of a tractor. The bilge pumps hum, the ventilators pump aid through
the boat--a stream of sound to make the nerves relax--like a soothing
bath.
I climb onto the bridge behind the lookouts.
Christ! A monstrous conflagration over the horizon.
"That must be the third steamer!" roars the Commander.
Against the dark heavens I can make out a black cloud above the red
inferno: smoke winding upward like a gigantic worm. We head toward it.
Soon the bow and stern of the vessel grow clearly visible, but her
midship is almost invisible.
The wind brings the acrid, suffocating smell of fuel oil.
"Broke their back," the Commander raps out. He orders full speed
ahead and changes course. Our bow is now pointing straight at the
conflagration.
The glare of the fire flickers, lighting the gigantic smoke clouds
from underneath, and through the smog we can make out tongues of flame.
Now and again the entire cloud is shot through from inside with
flashes of yellow, and individual bursts soar up into the darkness like
star shells. Real rockets explode, rose-blood red, through the welter of
smoke. Their reflections snake across the dark water between us and the
burning ship.
A single mast stands out black against the reflection of the fire,
rising up out of the flames like an admonitory finger. The wind forces
the smoke in our direction, as if the ship wanted to shroud herself and
go down unseen. Only the stern of the tanker is visible as a dark hulk.
It must have heeled toward us; when the wind blows the smoke away I
recognize the tilted deck, a few superstructures, the stump of what was
once a loading crane.
"No need to fire again!" The Commander's voice is harsh and husky.
His words turn into a hoarse gurgle which seems to die away in drunken
laughter.
Nevertheless, he doesn't order the boat to turn aside; on the
contrary, we slowly draw closer and closer to the inferno.
All around the stern of the tanker dark-red flames are licking up
out of the sea: the water itself is on fire. Spilled fuel oil.
"Perhaps we can find out her name!" says the Commander.
The rumbling and cracking of a brush fire reaches us, followed by a
sharp hissing and snapping. The sea is now yellow with the reflection of
the burning stern and red from the flaming oil.
Then we in turn are flooded with the same crimson glare. Every slit
in the grating stands out in the light of the leaping flames.
I turn my head. Everyone's face is red--distorted red masks.
Now there is the thud of another explosion. And then--I prick up my
ears--wasn't that a hoarse cry? Could there still be people on board?
Didn't I just see a gesticulating arm? I squint--but there's nothing in
the binoculars but flames and smoke. Nonsense, no human sound could make
itself heard through this inferno.
What will the Old Man do? Now and again he gives an order to the
helmsman. I know: stay head on--don't be silhouetted against the
conflagration. "Look sharp!" says the Old Man, and then, "She'll be going
down any minute now!"
I barely hear him, We stand there rooted. Madmen, desperadoes,
staring into a hell of flames.
How far is it? Eight hundred yards?
The significance of its being such a big ship gnaws at me. How many
men would such a vessel carry as minimum crew? How many dead this time?--
twenty, thirty? British ships are certainly sailing with as few men as
possible these days. Perhaps they even divide their watches in two
instead of three. But they couldn't manage with less than ten seamen,
plus eight for engines, wireless, officers, and stewards. Has a destroyer
picked them up? But to do that it would have to stop--can a destroyer run
such a risk, with a U-boat in the immediate vicinity?
Over there a cluster of glaring red beams of fire shoots into the
sky: the still-floating stern spits out trails of sparks. And then a
distress rocket. So there are still people on board! God in heaven-- in
that inferno!
"That went off by itself. There's no one left on board. It's
impossible!" the Old Man says in his ordinary voice.
Once more I use the binoculars to grope my way through the smoke.
There! No doubt of it: people! Crowded together on the stern. For a
second I see them sharp against the blazing backdrop. Now some are
jumping into the water; only two or three are left, still running about
up there on the deck. One of them is hurled into the air. I see him
clearly, like a disjointed doll, against the reddishyellow glare.
The navigator roars, "There are some over there, too!" and points
to the water in front of the burning tanker. I snatch up my glasses: a
raft with two people on it.
I keep my binoculars on them for half a minute. No sign of
movement. Undoubtedly dead.
But there! The black humps--they must be swimmers!
The Second Watch Officer turns his glasses in that direction too.
The Old Man explodes. "Look out! For god's sake, you're supposed to be
keeping watch astern."
Aren't those screams I'm hearing through the crackling? One of the
swimmers raises an arm for an instant. The others, seven--no, ten--men
are recognizable only as floating black balls.
The wind forces the banners of oily smoke down once more and I lose
sight of the swimmers. Then they're there again. No doubt about it--
they're making for our boat. Behind them the red tongues of spreading oil
reach out in an ever-widening front.
I glance sideways at the Commander. "Damn risky," I hear him
murmur, and I know what he means, We've come too close. It's getting hot.
For two or three minutes he says nothing. He picks up his
binoculars, puts them down again, struggling to come to a decision; then
in a voice so husky it almost cracks he calls down the order for both
diesels to be reversed.
The men in the engine room will be wide-eyed. Reverse--we haven't
had that one before. Nasty: Now we can't crash dive--the boat has no
steerageway.
The burning oil spreads faster than the men can swim. They haven't
a chance. The fire on the water devours the oxygen. To suffocate, to burn
to death, to drown--whoever is caught will die in all three ways at once.
Luckily the crackling of the conflagration and the dull roar of
minor explosions render their screams inaudible.
The red-tinged face of the Second Watch Officer wears a look of
horror.
"Can't understand it," the Old Man says dully. "No one came to pick
them up I too find it incomprehensible. All those hours! Were they
trying at first to save the ship? Perhaps she was still manageable after
the hit; perhaps the engines were still good for a few knots. Possibly
they tried to put the fire out in the hope that they could still escape
an enemy submarine. I shudder at what that crew must have gone through.
"Now we won't even find out her name!" I hear the Old Man say. He's
trying to be ironic.
Nausea in my throat. I have a vision of the man I helped to rescue
out of the huge pooi of fuel oil in the harbor basin after an air attack.
He stood there on the pier, vomiting and shaken with convulsive cramps
and groans. The burning oil had scorched his eyes. Luckily a sailor
appeared with a fire hose. He washed off the slime at such high pressure
that the poor wretch was knocked down and rolled over the stones like a
shapeless black bundle.
Suddenly the stern of the tanker rises, looming up as if it were
being thrust out of the water from underneath. For a while it stands,
steep as a cliff, in the burning sea; then with two or three muffled
explosions it plunges, roaring, out of sight.
In seconds the sea closes over the spot where it sank, sucking in
the huge ship as though it had never existed. Of the swimmers there is
nothing more to be seen.
Our men who are below must now be able to hear the music of
destruction, the terrifying groaning, cracking, and tearing, the
explosions of the boilers, the breaking up of the holds. How deep is the
Atlantic here? Sixteen thousand feet? Thirteen thousand at least.
The Commander orders us to turn away.
"Nothing more for us to do here!"
The bridge lookouts are back in their usual positions, motionless,
their binoculars to their eyes. Forward above the horizon there's a dim
reddish glow, such as big cities cast against the sky at night. And now
in the southwest something brightens and flares almost up to the zenith.
"Navigator, take this down. 'Glow of flames visible at two hundred
thirty degrees.' And add ship's time. Other boats are in action over
there. We'll just take a look and see what kind of neon sign it is," he
mutters in my direction and orders the bow turned toward the flickering
light.
What now? Is this going to go on until we're left drifting
somewhere with empty tanks? Haven't we had enough? The Old Man's probably
itching to pull himself down a destroyer. As repayment, revenge for our
ordeal.
The Chief disappears from the bridge.
"So it goes," says the Old Man. "But it's high time we sent that
signal! Navigator--paper and pencil. We'd better begin again. Now we can
describe the whole thing properly . . ."
I know what he means: the risk of being spotted if we send more
than a brief radio signal is now irrelevant. By this time the Tommies are
well aware that we're active in this vicinity. No further need to worry
about their taking bearings on our transmitter.
"Just take it down--as follows: 'Depth charge pursuit--by
destroyers.' 'Sophisticated depth bomb pursuit' might be better.
'Numerous attacks'--but who cares about that? They can just as well find 
it in the war log; So let's leave it at that: 'Numerous attacks.' They're
a lot more interested in what we sank, navigator, so we'll keep it
absolutely simple: 'Depth charge pursuit by destroyers.' Leave out the
'numerous attacks' as well. To continue: 'Depth bomb attack. Five
torpedoes fired. Four hits. Passenger liner eight thousand GRT and
freighter five thousand five hundred GRT. Sinkings clearly audible. Hit
on eight thousand GRT tanker. Sinking observed-- UA."
"Passenger liner," the Old Man had dictated. Was that one of the
ones re-equipped as troop transports? I don't want to picture the effect
of a torpedo hitting a fully loaded troop transport . . . The drunken
loudmouth in the Bar Royal: "Destroy the enemy, not just his ships!"
From below comes the report that the radioman has picked up SOS
calls from British steamers. "Well, well," says the Old Man. Not a word
more.
At 07.30 hours we pick up a signal from one of our own boats. The
navigator reads it aloud, quite carried away. "Sank three steamers.
Fourth ship probable. Four hours depth charge pursuit during attack.
Convoy broken into groups and lone ships. Contact broken off. Pursuing
southwest--UZ."
I stare at the glow over the horizon, which is punctuated now and
again by bright flashes.
A frenetic jumble of sequences races through my mind: The
projector's running too fast. Pieces of film have been spliced together
meaninglessly, at random, and there are a lot of double exposures. Again
and again I see clouds from explosions, which remain frozen for a few
instants and then collapse, dropping a rain of planks and fragments of
iron. I see the black smoke of oil darkening the sky like a gigantic
skein of wooi. Then the crackling of the blaze, the flame of oil on
water--and the struggling black balls in front of it.
I'm overwhelmed with horror at what we have done with our
torpedoes. Delayed reaction. One stab at the firing lever! I close my
eyes to blot out the haunting visions, but I continue to see the sea of
flames spreading out over the water and men swimming for their lives.
How does the Old Man feel when he visualizes the mass of ships that
he himself has destroyed? And when he thinks of the crowds of men who
were traveling on those ships and went down with them, or were blown up
by the torpedoes--scalded, maimed, dismembered, burned to death,
smothered, drowned, smashed. Or half scalded and half smothered and then
drowned. Almost two hundred thousand tons: a medium-sized harborful of
ships chalked up by him alone.
After a while there's a report from below that messages have been
received. Kupsch is in contact with the same convoy; Stackmann has scored
a hit on a six thousand GRT.
I'm hit by waves of weariness. I must not lean against the bulwark
or the TBT--otherwise I'll go to sleep standing up. Dull emptiness in my
skull. And I can feel a spastic writhing in my guts. And pressure in my
bladder. Stiff-legged, I climb down into the boat.
The chief mechanic Franz is not in the Quarters. Since making such
a fool of himself, he's kept out of sight. Actually this ought to be his
time off. He's probably afraid to set foot out of the engine room.
As I emerge from the head, the Second Watch Officer is at the door.
So he feels the same need. My god, what a sight: the face of an elderly
dwarf, creased and petulant. Has the stubble of his beard actually turned
darker? I stare at him disconcertedly until I realize it's an illusion--
the result of his chalk-white skin. The stubble simply stands out more
than before.
When he reappears, he asks the steward for coffee.
"I think lemonade might be better," I say.
The steward pauses, irritated. The Second Watch Officer sprawls in
the corner of the sofa without bothering to reply.
"Lemonade," I decide. "For me too."
Sleep would do us both good. So what's the point of coffee?
I'm just stretching, seeing what it feels like, when the Old Man
appears and says, "Quick, something to eat!"
The steward comes in with the lemonade and two cups.
"Strong coffee and cold cuts for me, and make it fast!" says the
Old Man.
The steward is back in no time. The cook must have had the food
ready and waiting.
The Old Man chews, pauses, and chews some more, staring straight
ahead. The silence becomes oppressive.
"Three more ships gone," he says, but without a trace of triumph in
his voice; on the contrary, it sounds sullen and grating.
"Damn nearly us too!" The words slip out.
"Rubbish," says the Old Man and stares holes in the air. He chews
for a minute or two and then I hear him say, "At least we always carry
our own respectable coffin around with us. We're just like snails."
This banal image seems to please him. "Just like snails," he
repeats, nodding to himself with a weary grin.
So that's all there was to it: the enemy--just a few shadows above
the horizon. Firing the torpedoes--not even a perceptible jolt. The
unearthly flames--our victory bonfire, Nothing seems to fit together any
more: first the hunting fever, then the attack, the depth charges, the
hours of torture. But even before that the sounds of the sinking ships--
and then when we surfaced, the burning hulk-- the third victim! Four
torpedoes scored direct hits--and we're deep in depression.
The Old Man seems to come out of a kind of trance. He straightens
up and shouts into the gangway, "Ship's time?"
"07.50 hours!"
"Navigator!"
He appears instantly from the control room.
"Can we get at them again?"
"Difficult!" says the navigator. "Unless . . ." The navigator
pauses and begins again. "That is, unless they change their general
course."
"We can hardly count on that . . ."
The Old Man follows him into the control room. I hear fragments of
dialogue and the Old Man thinking aloud. "Dived at 22.53 hours, let's say
23.00--now it's 07.50, so we've lost a good eight hours. How fast are
they moving? Probably about eight knots, so they've made sixty-four
miles--at a very rough guess. To get where they are flOW we'd need more
than four hours at full speed. But the fuel situation! It's too long at
full speed; and, besides, the convoy will be that much farther ahead."
Nevertheless, he still seems unwilling to make any preparations to
reverse our course.
The Chief turns up in the control room. He doesn't say a word, but
the very way he stands there is a question in itself: When do we turn
back?
Despite my exhaustion I can't sleep. I might as well be full of pep
pills. Excitement is making me restless. No one in the Quarters. Uproar
in the bow compartment. Must be some sort of half-hearted victory
celebration, I push the hatch open. In the murky light I can make out a
circle of men sitting on the floor plates, which are now back in place. I
hear ragged singing. They drag out the last line until it sounds like a
chorale. It's all very well for them to holler--they didn't see a thing,
poor devils.
If they hadn't been told that the detonations and shrieking of
rending metal came from the water pressure smashing the sides and holds
of sinking ships--our targets--they wouldn't have been able to make head
or tail of the deafening underwater uproar.
The navigator is on watch. The glow has died down but is still
clearly visible. Suddenly he calls, "Something moving!" His right arm is
pointing out over the dark sea ahead. He sends word below. Within seconds
the Old Man is on the bridge.
It looks like a raft, with a bunch of men on it.
"Megaphone on deck," orders the Old Man and then, "Closer!" He
props himself high against the bulwark and roars, "_What's the name of
your ship?_" in English.
The men down there are quick to answer, as if this might buy them
the reward of a rescuing hand: "_Arthur Allee!_"
"Just as well to know," says the Old Man.
One of the men tries to cling on to our boat, but we've already
picked up speed. He hangs between us and the raft, And then he lets go
and sinks into our foaming wake. Teeth--all I can make out is two rows of
teeth, not even the whites of his eyes.
Will anyone find the others?
We haven't been going another quarter hour before a strange
twinkling appears on the water in the pale light. Tiny flashing points--
like fireflies. As we approach, they turn out to be little lamps dancing
up and down. More survivors, hanging in their life preservers. I can
clearly see them waving their arms. Trying to attract our attention?
They're probably shouting too, but none of it reaches us because the wind
is against them,
Stony-faced, the Old Man orders reduce speed and gives commands to
the helmsman that will prevent the boat from coming too close to the
drifting men. But we're still moving so fast that our bow wave catches
two or three of them, slamming them up and then down again. Are they
really waving at us or is that a threat, a last impotent gesture against
the enemy who has turned them over to the deadly grasp of the sea?
We all stand there frozen--six men with fear clawing at our hearts,
each knowing that any one of those men thrashing in the sea might be us.
What will become of them? They escaped immediate catastrophe when their
ship sank. But is there any hope for them? How cold is the water in
December? Does the Gulf Stream reach this far? How long have they already
been floating there? It's hard to believe: the ships guarding the
convoy's rear must have passed the disaster area hours ago.
The Old Man stands motionless: a sailor who dares not help another
in distress because an order from the C-in-C forbids rescuing surviving 
personnel! There's only one exception: flyers who have been shot down.
They have valuable information. Apparently they're worth their weight in
gold.
I can still see the little lights like will-o'-the-wisps. "Port
five!" the Old Man orders. "Those were Navy men, probably from a
corvette."
The Second Watch Officer appears. "Looks like an erupting volcano,"
he says to himself, meaning the fiery glow. The little lights have
vanished.
There's a flash through the smoke. After a while an explosion rolls
across the water like dull thunder, followed by yet another. A report
comes up: "Sound room to bridge: Depth charges at two hundred sixty
degrees!"
All hell must have broken loose in the convoy. The wind brings us
the smell of burning oil: the stench of death.
Pale morning light is rising over the horizon. The glow of the fire
gradually subsides.
I'm dead on my feet, almost ready to drop, when the bridge reports,
"Burning vessel ahead!" It's 09.00. No choice but to struggle up to the
bridge again.
"She's been hit," says the Old Man. "A straggler. We'll finish her
off!"
He puts the binoculars to his eyes and his voice emerges from
between gloved hands as he addresses the navigator. "First get a forward
position. She's probably slowed down. About five knots, I'd say."
The Old Man gives a change of course: "Two points to port." The
cloud of smoke grows rapidly larger and slowly moves to starboard. We
should be able to see masts and even superstructures by now, but the
smoke has shrouded everything.
Another five minutes, then the Old Man orders the boat to dive and
level off at periscope depth: forty-five feet.
After a while he gives a kind of battle report from the tower:
"Mustn't let her get away--she's tacking--well, if we hold on for a
while, she'll tack again--just wait . . . Ship has two masts, four
loading hatches, nice little scow--about eight thousand_riding low at the
stern--fire aft. Think she's also been burning amidships."
His voice becomes a snarl. "Chief! She's turning this way!" The
periscope must have been underwater for a moment, blocking his view.
The Chief makes a face. Now it's up to him to trim ship precisely
so that the Commander can operate as much as possible without moving the
periscope. The Chief cocks his head forward and to one side, toward the
Papenberg.
A series of rudder maneuvers. Suddenly the Old Man has the motors
run full speed. The boat gives a palpable leap forward.
Then I hear the First Watch Officer above me reporting that the
tubes are ready. The lateral directional angles are being transmitted to
the lead-angle calculator in the tower, and from the lead-angle
calculator to the torpedoes.
The First Watch Officer has long since pulled the safety catch from
the firing mechanism. He's waiting there in the tower for the Old Man to
get us lined up for the shot.
Is all this never to end? My mind is reeling. Am I dreaming? Did I
hear: "Open torpedo doors"?
"Tube one stand by!" Two seconds pause: "Tube one fire!"-- "Connect
tube two!"
I seem to be living in some vivid waking dream. The sound of dull
detonations, immediately followed by a much sharper one.
The Commander's voice seems to be coming from a great distance.
"Lying dead in the water now!"
And then, almost subconsciously, I hear, "Seems to be sinking
slowly."
Yet another! Will that be added to our score? The fog in my head is
getting thicker. Weakness in the knees. Just keep on your feet. I hold on
to the chart table, work my way slowly to the after hatch. My bunk seems
miles away.
Was it a noise that woke me so suddenly?
Peace reigns in the petty officers' quarters. I clamber out of my
bunk. Feel my way into the control room like a blind man. Pain in every
limb as if I were just out of traction.
There's some life in the control room. Tin-ear Willie and the Bible
Scholar are fussing about. I still can't make out what happened. Did I
keel over? Pass out? Am I awake or dreaming?
Then I happen to see the war log. It's lying open on the desk.
12/13--yes, that must be right. Crazy: in a month Christmas will be long
past. No longer any sense of the time of year. Completely lost. I read:
09.00 Battle-damaged tanker. Running at slow speed, five knots.
Course about 120 degrees. Attain forward position to determine firing
data.
10.00 Dive for underwater attack. Tanker turns toward us, making
range very close.
10.25 Fire torpedo. Hit scored amidships. Simultaneous major
explosion of fuel oil. Great quantities of smoke and flame. Escaping oil
burning on water. Huge smoke cloud in sky. Strong blaze. Steamer sinks
deeper but continues to make headway. Some of crew still on board. Three
guns on superstructure aft. Cannot be used on account of smoke and heat.
No lifeboats visible.
The fact that the tanker had guns is something the Old Man didn't
tell us. When in God's name did he write all this? How late is it now?
10.45 Propeller sounds. Moving forward.
10.52 Renewed attack. Waiting too dangerous. May be a trap. Hit
scored below after mast. Another blaze. Tanker stops. Settles dee per
astern. Flank blown out at point of impact. Fire on water spreading
quickly. Must reverse engines fast.
11.10 & 11.12 Detonations on hoard. Apparently compartments
exploding. Gasoline containers or munitions. Tanker lying dead in the
water.
11.40 Propeller noises. Turbines. Suspect destroyer. Not visible in
periscope.
11.55 Surface. Tanks not blown. Destroyer lying motionless beside
wreck.
I was present during all that. But tile second torpedo shot . . . ?
Everything is a jumble: just how did I come to be lying in my bunk?
11.57 Crash dive. Silent running. Retreat.
12.10 Surface. Intend to remain motionless and wait to see whether
tanker sinks. Batteries charged. Destroyer's mast visible on horizon from
time to time in neighborhood of wreck.
13.24--14.50 Remain stopped. Tanker staying afloat. Fire slowly
dying out.
15.30 Decide to approach again and give coup de grace. Tanker is
broken in two at point of impact forward of the after superstructures.
Parts connected only by gangways. Complete loss certain. Foreship twisted
sideways and awash. Lifeboats drifting empty. Destroyer has obviously
abandoned tanker.
16.40 Approach closer and shoot holes in bow and stern with machine
gun.
20.00 Return voyage begun. Other boats in contact. Dispatched
radiogram: "Sank damaged tanker 8ooo GRT. Returning to base--UA."
23.00 Radio gram received: "From UX: Two large freighters 00.31
Square Max Red. General course east. Ten knots. Have been out of contact
for an hour. Am pursuing. Wind west-northwest 7. Sea 5, barometer 1027
and rising. Use of weapons still curtailed by weather."
So: three torpedoes for that scow! A copybook periscope attack.
Plus machine guns. I certainly heard their chattering. Just when did I
pass out?
I stare at the page. Even the last entry is in the Old Man's
handwriting. Slowly the whole thing begins to seem uncanny. He even had
the energy to write up the war log during the night. I can still hear him
say: "Nothing more now but home to Kassei," and his order to steer a
course of forty-five degrees. And I realize I knew that we were headed
northeast.
It's hard, pulling myself together. The diesel sounds . . . oddly
irregular. Of course--economy speed!
Economy speed! If I understood the Chief correctly, he knows he can
do his damnedest to figure out the "most favorable" speed for the return
voyage; but the fuel oil still won't last us to Saint Nazaire.
The navigator has unfolded a big sea chart that shows coastal lines
as well. I'm astonished to see how far south we've come. The Old Man
doesn't seem to be worried about fuel, or does he really believe that the
Chief has secret reservoirs to tap in time of need?
The green curtain in front of the Old Man's cubbyhole is drawn.
Asleep. Instinctively I start to tiptoe. I have to steady myself with
both hands, my limbs ache so.
The bunks in the officer's quarters are occupied too. The first
time we've actually had a full sleeping car. I feel like a conductor,
checking that everything's all right.
Everyone asleep--that means the navigator has the watch. The third-
-so it must be after eight p.m.
My watch has stopped.
The next compartment is quiet too. Chief mechanic Franz's bunk is
empty. Of course: the engine room watch has been on duty since six
o'clock.
The Old Man hasn't said another word about the Franz incident. Will
he have forgotten it entirely, or does he intend to follow it up with a
court-martial?
Not a sound through the bow compartment hatch,
A sleeping boat. No one awake, no one to talk to. I sit down on the
chart chest, stare blankly ahead, and fall prey to tormenting visions.
IX PROVISIONING
Herrmann yells, "Communications Officer!"
Ordinary signals are deciphered by the radioman, using the code
machine, and entered in plain text in the radio log, which is shown to
the Commander every two hours.
When Herrmann put this particular message through his machine, it
made no sense. Only the first words, "Officer's signal," were
comprehensible. Hence the Communications Officer (who is otherwise known
as our Second Watch Officer).
He must have heard the report come in, for he scrambles out of his
bunk with tousled hair, looking self-important, and sets up the decoding
machine on the table. The Commander gives him today's code-setting on
soluble paper. (The connecting pins of the machine are soluble in salt
water too, so there can be no accidents with the enemy.)
Communications Officer! That's all we need. It must be about some
new and special operation, something really tricky, supersecret.
"Hurry it up!" says the Old Man.
The first word the Second Watch Officer deciphers is "Commander."
That means that when he puts the entire message through his decoding
machine he'll get nothing out of it. In other words, this is in triple
code. The Commander himself must now do the whole job again, using a
setting known only to himself.
Significant glances: absolutely unprecedented. Never happened
before on this patrol. What's in store for us? The Old Man disappears
into his hole with the decoding machine and summons the First Watch
Officer. The two rummage about among the papers for a good five minutes.
The atmosphere is tense. When the Old Man finally reappears, he says not
a word. Everyone is silent.
"Interesting," he murmurs finally. Nothing else, though all eyes
are fixed on him. Another several minutes go by before he finally speaks.
"We've been assigned a new port of call."
His voice is not quite as calm as he obviously would like. There
must be something fishy about this new destination.
"Really?" the Chief says casually, as if he didn't give a damn
where he was meant to provision the boat next.
"La Spezia."
"What's that?"
"Exactly what I said--La Spezia. Have you just gone deaf, Chief?"
The Commander pushes himself to his feet, steers his way back to
his cubbyhole, and disappears behind the curtain. We can hear him
rummaging around again.
I can see the map of Europe--every indentation of it. At school,
nobody could beat me at drawing the map of Europe freehand. La Spezia--
Italy. What a mess! There's an empty feeling in the pit of my stomach.
Deep-down terror; I blink and gasp like a fish out of water.
The Second Watch Officer stammers, "But that means--"
"Yes, the Mediterranean!" the Chief interrupts sharply. "We seem to
be needed there." He swallows, his Adam's apple jerking conspicuously.
"So it's off to Gibraltar!"
"Gibraltar echoes the Second Watch Officer, looking at me openmouthed.
"Dshebel al Tank!"
"What?"
"Gibraltar in Arabic: Tank's Mountain."
Gibraltar: a rock inhabited by apes. Closeup of an ape mother with
infants clinging to her stomach. Glint of bared teeth. A British crown
colony. The Pillars of Hercules. A bridge for the migration of peoples
between Europe and Asia. Africa ole! Tangier! Tang, tangier, tangiest!
The Gibraltar convoys! Half the British fleet is around Gibraltar.
Somewhere in my head there's a phonograph needle stuck in a groove:
Gibraltar--Gi-bral-tar--plaster altar, plaster altar, plaster altar.
This won't go down very well with the Old Man either. He can hardly
be itching to explore the Mediterranean. Let alone a trashy harbor
somewhere in Italy. The Führer decrees--and we're stuck with the
consequences! That's the motto we need: it should be burned in capital
letters on the lid of a lemon crate and hung in the control room.
Now I begin to make sense of the radio news reports of the last few
weeks. North Africa, the heavy fighting at Tobruk. The British advance
westward along the coast road. The Mediterranean must be teeming with
British convoy freighters and fighting ships. And now the U-boats are
supposed to go in and mop up?
I visualize every detail of the map of the Strait of Gibraltar, and
on it I project a hideously tangled system of direction finders,
antishipping nets, dense cordons of patrol boats, mines, and every
imaginable kind of nasty surprise.
I'm still stunned, unable to think straight. But repeating
themselves somewhere in the back of my head are the persistent words: DUE
FOR REPAIR. Our scow is certainly due for repair after all the punishment
we've taken. What can be the meaning of this madness? If only the Old Man
would be frank for once.
"Fuel oil--fuel oil," is the next thing I hear from the control
room. And again, "Fuel oil." Once from the Old Man and once from the
navigator.
Then, "New course ninety degrees!"
Ninety degrees? Due east? I don't grasp that at all.
When the Old Man comes back from the control room and sits down at
the table with a scowl on his face, as though he's still lost in his
course calculations, it should be up to the Chief to ask the question we
all want answered: Where do we get the fuel oil?
But the Chief's mouth might as well be closed with surgical tape.
The Old Man spends a good five minutes clawing at his beard. Then he
growls, "Provisioning at Vigo."
Vigo--Vigo--Vigo! Why there? Vigo--that's in Spain, or is it
Portugal? Where the hell is Vigo?
The Chief is sucking his lips so hard that he's making creases in
his cheeks. "Mhm," is all that comes out of him.
"Very considerate of High Command," the Commander says derisively.
"They think of just about everything, after their _own_ worries, that is.
Two hundred fifty miles--or thereabouts. I suppose we can manage that
without sails--eh, Chief--what do you say?"
The calendar shows December 14, the day we were supposed to put in
at our base port. Now, instead of returning in French they want us to do
it Spanish; after that, in Italian. Real cosmopolitan stuff. Reception
with castanets instead of with Greater Germany's brass band; hundredyear-old sherry instead of beer.
Spanish gardens, Spanish fly, what else is there that's Spanish?
"Impeccable arrangements," says the Old Man. "No need to goggle
like that, Chief. You'll get plenty of fuel oil and torpedoes. And food,
of course--a full-scale provisioning, just like home port!"
How does he know all this, I wonder. After all, the coded signal
was quite short.
"What More Could Heart Desire?" says the Chief.
The Old Man merely looks at him disapprovingly.
It occurs to me that this was to have been the Chief's last patrol.
It's certainly his twelfth, and this is his second boat. There aren't
many these days who've survived twelve patrols. And now--at the very
end_they're offering him a special treat. Let's call a spade a spade:
It's a superb chance to drown--one minute before closing time.
I pull myself together and climb through the hatch.
As yet the crew has no notion of what lies ahead. They'll be pretty
goddam surprised. Instead of the channel at Saint Nazaire and a brass
band, a Macaroni port with a whole load of trouble and grief before we
get there.
But the "lords" seem to have got wind of the fact that something's
up. Suddenly every face is tense, questioning. The silence after the
signal could only mean that some crucial message had come in. And the
order to the helmsman soon after would be perfectly self-explanatory to
anyone who used his head. In any case, we're no longer on course for our
home port.
All conversation ceases immediately whenever I enter a room.
Anxious faces. But as long as the Old Man makes no announcement, I must
do my best to look casual.
His expression is eloquent enough: Is it even possible to break
through into the Mediterranean in the first place? And if so, what next?
The enemy has the advantage of a number of nearby land bases, which means
that its aerial surveillance over the Mediterranean is incomparably
tighter than over the Atlantic. Can boats operate there at all during the
daytime? Given really good lighting conditions and angle of vision, they
say a plane can spot a U-boat as much as two hundred feet down--as a kind
of shadow.
The bosun's broad forehead is distinguished by a diagonal scar
running from his right eyebrow to the base of his nose. It turns reddish
whenever he's excited. Right now it's gone puce.
The navigator has no such reliable "index of emotions." He's got
the perfect poker face: a classic example of a fixed type. He changes
places with the Commander at the chart table and starts behaving like a
tiger with his prey, growling at anyone who even comes near him, so no
one can see which chart he's working on with his protractor and dividers.
"We've been running on a different course for the last hour now,"
says Turbo in a low voice as he comes through the control room from
astern.
"Bright boy, you don't miss a thing!" Hacker sneers. "They ought to
use you for airplane cover."
An hour _already!_ A whole hour, sixty minutes? Don't make me
laugh! What does an hour mean to us? How many have we spent wallowing
around aimlessly, how many have we wasted just to get us through the
routine. Of course, their value began to rise the moment we started for
home. Right now it would still be a hundred forty hours before we put in-
-assuming normal conditions. A hundred forty units of time--sixty minutes
each--at fuel-hoarding cruising speed, and always hoping there'll be no
enemy aircraft. At full speed we'd probably make it in no more than
thirty. But full speed is out of the question. Everything's out of the
question, as a matter of fact--gone to hell. Change of plan!
Cruising speed. The crew spends the second hour racked with nervous
curiosity. The Old Man continues to maintain his silence.
On my way into the petty officers' quarters to fetch some writing
materials I hear, "Funny kind of course . . ."--"Well yes, maybe the
powers-that-be want us to admire the sunset in the Bay of Biscay."--
"Putting it to a girl in Saint Nazaire, a really good fuck; you can write
that all off. The whole thing's beginning to stink."
Silence.
Then I hear the familiar crackling of the loudspeaker. Finally--
the Commander!
"Attention. We've been given a new port of call. La Spezia. As you
know, that lies in the Mediterranean. Provisioning in Vigo. On the coast
of Spain."
No comment, not a syllable of explanation, no excuses-- nothing. He
simply says, "End," and there's another last crackle.
The off-duty mates stare dumbly into space. The E-mate Rademacher
looks at his piece of buttered bread as though it had been forced on him
by a stranger. Finally Frenssen breaks the spell. "Oh, shit!"
"My ass!" is the next exclamation.
The meaning of the order is gradually dawning on them: no return to
the base that has become a second home to them all. No chance of a
stylish landing maneuver, to show off in front of the the news hounds and
the carbolic brigade all standing there waiting with big bunches of
flowers clutched in front of their stiffly starched aprons. Christmas
leave? That's overboard too.
They're getting angry. "A helluva way to treat us!"--"What they
need is a kick in the ass!"--"If you don't like it you can get out and
walk!"--"Jesus, who'd have thought it!"
I look for the ensign. He's crouched on his bunk, hands hanging
down between his knees, face as white as a sheet, and eyes staring
vacantly in front of him.
"It'll make the Chief happy," says Frenssen; "we've used up almost
all our supplies. Almost no oil left and practically no fish, so why
should we fuss?"--"But Spain's neutral."--"Drop it. Someone else can
worry about that!"--"Looks like red tape to me!"--"You could tell
something like this was sure to happen just by sticking a finger up your
own ass!"--"We're going to have some real fun!"
Stricken silence still reigns in the bow compartment. The rattling
of a bucket between the torpedo tubes sounds unnaturally loud.
"It simply won't work," Ario says finally.
"Don't try to do the thinking for High Command," replies Dunlop.
"Have you never heard of provisioning?"
"But what's it all got to do with Spain? What's the name of that
dump?"
"Vigo."
"Shit!" says Bockstiegel. "Shit, shit!" And then, "Shit on
horseback."
"But they're--they really are--stark, raving mad!" The Gigolo is
stuttering with indignation. "The Mediterranean!" He puts so much disgust
into the word you'd think he was discussing a stinking sewer.
Turbo is worried. "They've probably written us off completely in
Saint Nazaire. What's to become of our duffel bags?"
"They'll be delivered with the rest of our estate!" Ario reassures
him.
"Shut your trap!" shouts the Gigolo. No one can take that joke.
"Christmas with the Macaronis! Who'd have guessed it?"
"How d'you mean, with the Macaronis? If you get leave, it doesn't
matter a shit whether you travel straight through France or straight
through Italy . . ."
"Up through Italy," Hagen corrects him.
"Well yes," says Ario resignedly. He's obviously thinking what no
one dares say aloud: If we ever get that far . .
"Gibraltar--what's so bad about that?" the Bible Scholar inquires
tentatively.
"Stupid stays stupid; pills won't help," is the answer he gets from
one of the hammocks. And from a lower bunk, "A creature like that's still
alive--and Schiller had to die!"
"Hasn't an inkling of geography; he's pathetic! You've probably
never noticed the way Gibraltar's constructed. Man, it's as narrow as a
virgin's slit. We'll have to smear our scow with Vaseline to get
through."
"It's been known to happen," Hagen says finally.
"What d'you mean?"
"A fellow getting stuck and not being able to get out again.
Happened to a classmate of mine. There he was jammed, like in a vise.
"You're kidding!"
"I promise you, it's true!"
"What happened next?"
"Nothing works, so they get the doctor. He has to give the lady a
shot. . ."
Turbo, always a stickler for precision, isn't satisfied. "And how
d'you get a doctor if you're stuck inside the lady?"
For the moment Gibraltar has lost its terrors.
"No idea. Scream?"
"Or wait till the snow falls!"
I find the Commander in the control room.
"A change is as good as a rest," I remark.
"Terrific!" he says morosely, then turns toward me and stares. As
usual, he's chewing on the stem of his cold pipe. We stand facing each 
other like statues for a while until he beckons me to sit down beside him
on the chart chest.
"Protecting our supply lines is probably what they call it.
Africa's burning and we're supposed to play firemen. It's lunacy--U-boats
in the Mediterranean when we haven't even enough in the Atlantic right
now. . ."
I try to be sarcastic. "Hardly the right season for the
Mediterranean. The C-in-C slipped up. . ."
"This doesn't seem to have been his idea. After all, he did
everything he could to keep us from being used for weather reporting. We
need _every_ boat for front-line combat. Why else did they build the VIIC's, except for the Battle of the Atlantic?"
Up to now, I think, we've been lording it over the world as a selfreliant fighting ship. Now we're no more than a pawn of higher strategy--
our nose turned toward Spain by remote control; our plans for the trip
home, along with everything that hinges on them, reduced to nothing. . .
"He's having quite a time of it, the Chief," the Commander begins
again haltingly. "It's his wife--she's expecting a child some time in the
next few days. We had everything so well worked out for his leave. Even
allowing for a long patrol. But of course we never figured on something
like this. They don't even have their own apartment. Completely bombed
out while he was on the patrol before last. They live with his wife's
parents in Rendsburg. Now he's afraid things may go wrong.
Understandable. There's something the matter with his wife. She almost
died in labor the last time, and the child was stillborn."
It's the first time that anyone's private life has been discussed.
Why is the Old Man telling me all this? It isn't at all his style.
An hour after dinner I get the answer. The Old Man is busy writing
up the war log when he notices that I'm trying to get past him. He says,
"Just a minute!" and pushes me onto his berth. "I intend to put you
ashore in Vigo--you and the Chief. The Chief's due to leave the boat
after this patrol anyway--that's official."
"But--"
"Let's not have any heroics. I'm working on the signal right now.
_Somehow_, you and the Chief are going to be guided through Spain--
disguised as gypsies for all I care."
"But--"
"No buts. It's too chancy for anyone to try singly. I've thought it
all out. We have agents there who'll get you through all right."
My thoughts are in chaos. Leave the boat now? How will that look?
Straight through Spain? What does he think he's up to?
I find the Chief in the control room. "I suppose you know already--
the Old Man's going to put us both ashore."
"What on earth are you talking about?"
"We're being put off at Vigo--you and I."
"How so?" The Chief sucks in his cheeks. I can see the idea working
in him. Finally he just says matter of factly, "All I want to know is how
the Old Man's going to make out with that muttonhead--especially now!" He
says no more, and it takes me a few moments to realize that the
muttonhead in question is his successor.
And the ensign, I think--if only we could take the ensign along
too.
Next time I come through the control room, the navigator's at the
chart table. Now at last our route can give him straight lines to draw on
his chart again. Everyone's busy. No one looks up; they're all privately
trying to come to terms with their disappointment and their fears.
By the second day the fear has subsided. There are still four days
at cruising speed between us and the actual approach to the Spanish
coast. The crew has got hold of themselves much quicker than might have
been expected, considering the low level of their morale. From my berth I
hear the familiar chatter resume.
"Last time I had real luck: all the way from Savenay to Paris in a
compartment with no one but a girl from the signal corps. It was really
something: no need to work up a sweat, once you're in--you just let the
train do the banging for you. But when we went through the junction, I
was almost flung out of her."
"I never do it in cars. No room for action. It's much better if I
get her to squat on the front seat, while I ram it in from behind--
standing up outside, get it?"
I looked through the crack in the curtain right into Frenssen's
face, alight with memories. "It rained once. My little chick stayed nice
and dry but I was soaking wet. It came down off the roof like out of a
drainpipe. But that way I could wash my cock off right away!"
"Did you go bareback?"
"Sure. The mouse knows how to be careful."
Later I hear: ". . . and then he went and got himself a girl
despite the fact he'd already been married for three years. Word of
honor, they're living together, all three of them."
"Well, well."
"He can't be a very sensitive type."
"Who needs sensitivity?"
It's shortly before noon on the third day after the Gibraltar
order, near the end of his watch, when the navigator calls down to report
a floating object. I climb onto the bridge behind the Commander. "Fortyfive degrees to starboard," says the navigator.
The object is still about three thousand feet away. The Commander
orders us to steer for it. It's not a lifeboat--more like a formless,
flat lump. The sea is calm. The thing seems to be moving toward us. Over
it hangs a strange cloud like a swarm of wasps. Seagulls? The Commander's
mouth tightens and he inhales sharply; otherwise he makes no sound. He
lowers his glasses: "Yellow spots-- that's a raft!"
Now I can recognize it in my own glasses. An unmanned raft with
barrels along the sides. Barrels? Or are they fenders?
"There are people on it!" the navigator says from under his
binoculars.
"So there are."
The Old Man gives a change of course. Our bow is now pointing
exactly toward the raft.
"No one moving over there!"
I stare through my binoculars. The drifting object grows steadily
larger. Aren't those seagull cries I hear?
The Commander sends both lookouts down from the bridge.
"Navigator, take over their sectors! No sight for the crew," he
murmurs to me.
He orders the helm to port, and we approach in an extended lefthand
curve. Our bow wave brushes the corpses that hang in the water around the
raft. One after another, they begin nodding like mechanical dolls in a
store window.
Five dead, all bound tight to the raft. Why aren't they lying on
it? Why are they hanging in the ratlines? The wind! Were they seeking
protection from the biting wind?
Cold and fear, how long can one endure them? How long does one's
body warmth resist the icy paralysis that grips the heart? How quickly do
one's hands die?
There's one of the corpses that keeps rising higher out of the
water than the others, making stiff bows that seem to go on and on.
"No name on the raft," says the Old Man.
Another of the dead seamen is floating, bloated, on his back.
There's no flesh left on the bones of his face. The seagulls have pecked
away everything soft. On his skull there remains only a small scrap of
scalp covered with black hair.
"Seems we got here too late." The Old Man gives orders to the
engine room and helmsman, sounding hoarse. ". . . the hell out of here,"
I hear him mutter.
The gulls sweep over us, shrill and evil. I wish I had a shotgun.
"Those were people from a liner!"
Good thing the Old Man's talking.
"They were wearing those old-fashioned life jackets. You don't
usually find them on warships any more." And after a while he mutters,
"Bad omen," and gives an order to the helmsman. He waits another ten
minutes before ordering the lookouts back on deck.
I feel ill and climb below. Barely ten minutes later and the
Commander comes down too. He sees me sitting on the chart chest and says,
"That's almost always the way it is with gulls. Once we found two
lifeboats. Everyone in them dead too. Frozen, probably. And all of them
had lost their eyes."
How long had they been drifting with the raft? I don't dare ask
him.
"The best thing," he says, "is to hit a gasoline tanker. That way
everything blows up at once. These problems don't arise. With crude oil,
unfortunately, it's different."
Although the bridge lookouts couldn't have seen much before the
Commander sent them below, there has obviously been talk in the boat. The
men speak in monosyllables. The Chief must have noticed something. He
stares questioningly at the Old Man, then quickly lowers his eyes.
In the wardroom there's no discussion at all. Not even one of the
hard-nosed comments that usually disguise the men's true feelings. You
might think that this was a particularly thick-skinned, unfeeling bunch,
that other men's fate left them cold. But the silence that has suddenly
fallen, the irritability that hangs in the air, prove otherwise. They're
probably seeing themselves hanging helplessly on a raft or drifting in a
boat. Everyone on board knows how small the chances are of a raft being
discovered in this area, and what fate awaits it even if the sea is calm.
Men who lose their ship in a convoy can cherish some hope of being picked
up--search units go to work; it's known where the disaster occurred, and 
rescue operations are begun at once. But these were not men from a
convoy. Otherwise we would have seen wreckage.
The approach to Vigo isn't easy. For days we've been unable to get
a proper fix on our position. Persistent fog. No sun, no stars. The
navigator has done his dead reckoning as well as he possibly can, but
it's impossible for him to estimate the drift--heaven knows how far we
are from our calculated position. Swarms of gulls accompany the boat.
They have black wing sheaths and narrower and longer pinions than the
Atlantic gulls. I have the impression that I can already smell land.
Suddenly I'm choked with longing for terra firma. How does it look
now? Late autumn_early winter. The only way to judge how late in the
season we are, here on board, is by watching the nights draw in. As
children we used to make potato fires at this time of the year and fly
homemade kites that were bigger than we were . .
Then I realize how wrong I am. Potato fire time is long past.
Indeed, I've lost all real sense of time, But still I see the milky-white
smoke from our fire, winding its way over the damp earth like a gigantic
maggot. The brushwood won't burn properly: it takes the rising wind to
make the fire glow red. We let our potatoes bake in the hot ashes. . .
the impatient testing with hard sticks to see whether they're done . . .
the black skin that crackles as it splits open . and then the first bite
into their mealy insides . . . the taste of smoke on our tongues . . .
the smell of smoke that clings to our clothes for days afterward!
Chestnuts in all our trouser pockets. Fingers yellow from cracking
walnuts. The bits of white meat that taste good only if you're careful to
peel the yellow skin out of all the crevices. Otherwise they're bitter.
06.00.
The dark circle of the tower hatch sways back and forth; I can tell
its motion by the wandering of the stars. Squeezing past the helmsman,
who's jammed in among his instruments along the wall on the forward side
of the tower, I climb up.
"Permission to come on the bridge?"
"_Jawohl!_" The voice of the Second Watch Officer.
Sunrise.
The sea today is a miniature range of foothills, all round, smooth,
undulating hummocks and intersecting lines. The hills roll past under the
boat, cradling us up and down. A good dozen seagulls circle us on
motionless wings. They stretch out their heads and look at us with stony
eyes.
It turns foggy during the navigator's watch. He looks worried. This
close to the coast, not knowing the ship's precise position, and now fog
to boot--there couldn't be a worse combination. Since we have to have a
bearing of some kind, whatever the cost, the Old Man orders the diesels
slow ahead and we creep closer to the coast.
The First Watch Officer is also on the bridge. We all peer forward
intently into the watery milk soup. Something solidifies into a lump in
the gray gloom and quickly takes shape: a fishing boat cutting across our
bow.
"We could always ask him where we are," growls the Old Man. "First
Watch Officer, d'you know Spanish?"
"_Jawohl_, Herr Kaleun!"
It takes a while for the First Watch Officer to realize the Old
Man's joking.
Gradually the wind rises, the fog thins out, and a rocky cliff
suddenly rises in front of us.
"Goddammit!" the Old Man says, "Stop engines--stop!"
We've come much too close.
"Let's hope there are no Spaniards out there," he mutters. "Well,
it's hardly the weather for an outing."
Our bow wave collapses. The sudden silence takes my breath away.
The bridge begins to sway. The Old Man is staring through his binoculars,
and Kriechbaum too is searching the coast intently.
"Good work, navigator!" the Old Man says finally. "We seem to be
almost exactly where we wanted to be--except a bit too close! Well now,
let's worm our way nice and quietly up to the entrance and then take a
look at the traffic. Both engines slow speed ahead! Steer thirty
degrees!"
The helmsman acknowledges the order.
"Water depth?" the Commander asks.
The First Watch Officer bends over the hatch and repeats the
question.
"Two hundred fifty feet!" comes the answer from below.
"Continuous soundings!"
The veils of mist are sweeping in once more.
"Perhaps not altogether unfavorable," says the Commander. "A kind
of camouflage overcoat. Look sharp, men; see that we don't smash anyone
to bits!"
We've made landfall on this coast a good two hours earlier than
originally calculated.
"The best thing, it seems to me," the Old Man begins slowly, "is to
use the northern entrance--underwater--then maybe out the same way again.
Spend the night provisioning and then beat it before daybreak, say around
four o'clock. Navigator, if possible, I want to be beside the provision
ship by 22.00. Six hours--that should be enough. We'll just have to hurry
like hell with the transfers!"
No lights, no bearings, no entrance buoys. Nothing. Even in the
easiest harbors there's a pilot to help every steamer enter and depart;
even with the most up-to-date charts and the clearest possible weather,
there must always be a pilot on board--only for us, these regulations are
totally irrelevant.
The veils of mist rise again.
"Neither here nor there. Better to wait till dark I hear the Old
Man say.
I leave the bridge.
Shortly thereafter the Old Man orders us down to periscope depth.
Using the electric motors we worm our way gradually closer and
closer to the harbor entrance.
The Old Man sits in the tower in the periscope saddle, his cap
turned backward the way old-fashioned motorcycle riders used to wear
them.
"What's that noise?" he asks urgently. We all listen. I can clearly
hear a high-pitched, uniform swishing, overlaid by a dull, hammering
sound.
"No idea!" says the navigator.
"Odd!"
The Old Man lets the periscope motor run for a second and then
stops it, so as to leave our asparagus stalk sticking the minimum
distance out.
"To the sound room: What do you have, bearing one hundred twenty
degrees?"
"A small diesel!"
"Probably some little coastal vessel. And another--and another--and
yet another, must be a gathering of the clans. But that one's moving--
Duck!" And after a while: "Bad visibility again. Can hardly see a damn
thing, we'll have to find some tub and follow her in."
"A hundred twenty-five feet!" reports the mate at the hydrophone.
"How would it be if we just anchored here?" the Old Man asks
through the hatch.
The navigator is silent. Obviously he's not taking the question
seriously.
Anchor? Actually, we do carry one of those symbols of hope around
with us, just like a steamer. I wonder if a U-boat has ever used one.
The Commander calls the First Watch Officer to relieve him at the
periscope and climbs down heavily. "In two hours it'll be dark; that's
when we'll run in--one way or another!"
"How are we going to proceed after that?" I ask.
"Exactly according to plan," is the dry answer.
The "p" of plan is spat out from between his teeth--his way of
expressing contempt for the whole arrangement.
Later on, however, he does finally condescend to explain. "Among
the secret documents we brought with us are instructions to cover
precisely this contingency. We've been radioed our exact arrival time.
Our agents in Vigo will take care of what's necessary--if they haven't
done so already."
"Nice work," murmurs the Chief.
"You can say that again."
"Time to surface," the navigator announces.
"Okay, then, let's go!" The Old Man gets to his feet.
Blue-gray evening twilight. The wind comes off the coast, bringing
the smell of land. I raise my nose like a dog sniffing quickly to
identify the layers of odor, the jumbled smells: rotting fish, fuel oil,
rust, burned rubber, tar--but over and through it all there's something
more: the smell of dust, the smell of earth, the smell of leaves.
The diesels spring to life. The Commander has apparently decided to
push on regardless.
A pair of running lights appears, twinkling. Red, green, then white
as well--and higher than the others--that one must be at the masthead.
The Second Watch Officer reports a ship edging toward us,
The Old Man turns his glasses, stands motionless for a while, then
orders our speed reduced. "Well, doesn't look--doesn't look at all bad.
She's planning to run in, no question about that! \Vhat would you say--
hmm? Let's just follow her for a while--seems to be another of those
small coastal steamers but a sturdy one. Makes a lot of smoke. Must be
using old felt boots for fuel. Wish it were a little darker!"
The Old Man hasn't had the tanks completely blown, so our upper
deck barely rises above the water. Unless someone sees us from the side,
we could hardly be recognized as a U-boat.
The Old Man turns the bow toward the starboard running light of the
approaching vessel. Seen from the steamer, we're lying against a stretch
of coast that obscures the outline of our tower: always remember your
background--the old rule!
The Old Man has the helm put slowly farther to starboard, so as to
keep the green light over our net guard until the stern light of the
steamer also comes into view. Only then does the Old Man increase our
speed by one notch. We're traveling directly in her wake. I can smell the
smoke.
"Phew!" exclaims the Old Man. "For god's sake, keep a sharp
lookout, in case anything cuts across our bow! There must be ferries and
other boats like that around!"
He's searching with his glasses. Suddenly there's a shadow to
starboard. No time to turn aside! W7e pass by SO close that we can see a
spot of light: no doubt about it--it's a man smoking a cigarette. If he'd
been paying any attention he'd have seen us, a strange shadow half hidden
in smoke.
Now we have three or four large shadows in front of us. Are they
approaching? Or going away? What's going on?
"All kinds of traffic," mutters the Old Man from under his glasses.
Lights--stern lanterns--a distant rumbling.
"They seem to be lying at anchor," I hear the navigator say.
"D'you think we've already reached the inner roadstead?"
"Seems so!"
A whole necklace of lights springs up in the distance, strung
delicately along the horizon, but broken here and there; that could mean
a pier with ships lying alongside--and the shadows of the ships causing
the dark spaces.
Steamers to starboard, too. Their position is hard to make out. If
they were all swinging from their anchors in the same direction, it would
be simple. But one vessel lies with her stern toward us, while the one
next door is showing her bow. Despite the darkness, their silhouettes are
clear against the distant lights.
"Lying between freighters, apparently," mutters the Old Man.
I've no notion how he expects to find the right steamer--the one
that's to provision us, the German ship Weser.
"Ship's time?"
"21.30 hours!"
"It's all going perfectly."
The Old Man gives two full-rudder orders in quick succession. There
seem to be difficult currents just here. The helmsman's working hard.
Jesus! If only we could use our searchlight. Stumbling about in a
strange house in the dark is sheer madness.
In any case, there are steamers by the dozen and apparently
warships too. Over there, three points to starboard, is something that
has to be a gunboat or small destroyer.
The Old Man orders the engines stopped. We keep moving for a while
under our own momentum, and as we move, our bow swings around to
starboard.
"Now all we have to do is find the right tub!" I hear the Old Man
say.
More engine-room commands, then steering orders, then more engineroom commands, and another staccato stream of steering orders. A zigzag
course between the big shadows.
Orders to the helmsman and the engine room come spitting out like
machine-gun fire.
"I'm going mad!" mutters the Second Watch Officer.
"That won't get the job done," growls the Old Man.
"There's a streetcar!" exclaims the Second Watch Officer.
Yes--a blue lightning flash, a streetcar! As though to prove the
point, the trolley strikes two or three more sparks from the overhead
cable.
In front of us lies a huge dark mass. It must be the overlapping
silhouettes of two or three ships.
"Someone's flashing!" the navigator reports.
"Where?"
I stare hard. For a fraction of a second a tiny point of light
flares up in the midst of the huge shadows.
The Old Man observes it silently. The cigarette glow reappears,
goes out, comes on again.
"The signal!" says the Old Man and takes a deep breath.
Incredulously, I stand with my eyes riveted to the constantly
blinking dot. It can't be more than a small flashlight!
"The things they expect of us!" I exclaim involuntarily.
"Anything brighter would be conspicuous," says the Old Man.
Our boat edges slowly closer to the dark mass that gradually
resolves itself into three shadows: three ships in a row. The light is
flashing from the middle one. The shadows steadily begin to draw apart.
We steer directly for the center one. It's lying at one hundred twenty
degrees, then one hundred. Gradually it rises, becomes a barrier wall.
The Old Man orders us to turn. Suddenly I hear German voices. "\Vatch
out! Fender! Get a move on!"--"Don't go overboard there, man!"--"Another
fender here!"
The strip of black water between the bulge of our port buoyancy
tank and the ship's steep side is steadily shrinking. Now we have to tilt
our heads to see the figures of the men bending over the railing above
us.
Our bosun is on the upper deck, herding his men back and forth with
half-muted curses. Four or five fenders are lowered from above.
"At least they know how to tie up!" says the Old Man.
"Maybe they've had some practice. Or d'you think we're the first?"
No answer.
A ship is anchored nearby in a blaze of floodlights, making a
murderous din as it loads cargo from some lighter-ships. The thudding of
the winches marks the beat.
"Just as well there's all that noise," says the Old Man.
The dim light from the Weser's portholes is the only illumination
allowed us.
A dull bump.
"Wonder how we're supposed to get up!"
Then a Jacob's ladder is dropped over the side. I'm allowed up
directly after the Commander. Christ, I'm stiff--no exercise! Hands reach
down to me from above. Iron plates resound under my feet. Someone seizes
my right hand. "A cordial welcome, Herr Kapitanleutnant!"
"No, no--I'm not--that's the Commander!"
Dazzled, we stand in the doorway to the saloon. Snow-white
tablecloths, two bunches of flowers, paneled walls polished like mirrors,
attractively draped curtains over the portholes, thick carpet. . . I move
in a kind of dream. Ornamental plants everywhere-- in pots on the floor,
suspended by chains from the ceiling. My god! Upholstered furniture, and
bunches of grapes in a bowl on the table.
Profound distrust settles in the pit of my stomach. Any minute now
there will be a loud bang, and this whole apparition will disappear.
I stare into the beaming parson's face of the strange Captain as if
he were a creature from another planet: white goatee, monk-like tonsure
surrounding a tanned bald spot, collar and tie.
Someone else shaking my hand. A sonorous voice that seems to come
from a great distance. More confusion. God knows the Old Man might have
put on something other than that eternal, disgusting sweater! After all,
we're in different surroundings. How can the Captain of the _Weser_ know
that this old-clothes peddler is our Commander? I can feel myself
blushing, but the Old Man and the Captain of the _Weser_ immediately get
together: vigorous shaking of hands, grins, animated conversation.
We're urged to sit down. The officers of the _Weser_ appear.
Christ! All in full dress uniform. More handshaking and grinning. The Old
Man might have worn his decorations for once.
The _Weser's_ Captain is positively overflowing with kindness. Like
a captain in a picture book: wrinkled, crafty, with big reddish ears. He
wants to do it all for us as well as he possibly can. The ship's bakery
has been hard at work since morning. There's everything: cakes, fresh
bread, whatever we want. My mouth begins to water.
"Christmas cakes too, and, of course, fresh rolls," says the
Captain.
I can still hear the Chief's description of his dream food: fresh
rolls, melting yellow butter, and hot cocoa.
The Captain's voice goes on in a ghostly chant: "Fresh sausages,
boiled pork--slaughtered just this morning--fried sausages. Every kind of
fruit, even pineapples. Unlimited supplies of oranges, fresh figs,
bunches of grapes, almonds. . ."
God in heaven! We've landed in the Garden of Eden. It's been years
since I've seen oranges or pineapples, and never in my life have I eaten
fresh figs.
The Captain relishes our speechless astonishment. Then he molions
across the table like a magician and in less than a minute great platters
of sausage and ham are carried in.
Tears start in my eyes. The Old Man is just as flabbergasted. He
rises from his chair as if all this prodigality is too much for him and
stammers, "I'll just go and take a quick look--see how things are going."
"Everything's going just fine--it's all moving along--everything's
going splendidly!" he's reassured from all sides, and the Captain pushes
him back into his seat.
The Old Man sits there embarrassed and stutters, "Fetch the First
Watch Officer--and the Chief. . ." I'm already on my feet.
"The Second Watch Officer and the Second Engineer are to stay on
board for the time being!"
"All the crew can bathe," the _Weser_ Captain shouts after me, "in
two shifts. Everything's ready."
When I reappear in the unaccustomed glare of the saloon, the Old
Man is still grinning with embarrassment. He fidgets uncertainly in his
chair, apparently uneasy at such peace and quiet.
The Captain wants to know how the boat's mission worked out. The
Old Man squirms.
"Yes, well. This time they really had their hooks in us. But it's
incredible what a boat like ours can stand!"
The Captain nods as if these few words are enough to explain
everything. An array of beer bottles is set up on the big table. It's
beer from Bremen, plus German whiskey, French Martell, Spanish Cognac,
Spanish red wine.
There's a knock at the door. What now? Two men in trench coats
appear, they take off their felt hats and glance rapidly from one of us
to the next as if they're after a criminal. Enter the police?
"Herr Seewald, representative of the naval attaché," I hear.
The second man seems to be some kind of agent. The First Watch
Officer and the Chief come in behind them. The saloon is filling up.
My heart is pounding. Any minute now we'll know whether the patrol
has come to an end for the Chief and me, or whether it will lead on to
Gibraltar.
More chairs are brought in. The Old Man is already leafing through
the papers that the taller of the two has handed him with a formal bow.
There's silence for a few moments, apart from the shuffling of
papers and the rising and falling howl of the wind.
The Old Man raises his eyes over the packet of papers and says,
"Turned us down, Chief. High Command has turned us down!"
I don't dare glance at the Chief. My own mind is racing: This means
I don't go either. Well then, it just won't happen; so be it! It's
probably all for the best.
I force a grin.
After all, the Old Man can't leave the boat either--nobody can--
and without the Chief, he'd be sunk. Am I afraid? The Old Man is sure to
win out. But then there's the opposing argument: The scow needs an
overhaul. All that damage--and repaired with nothing but material we had
on board. How can the thing hold up? How will we manage?
Vigo; for the time being we're right here in Spain. Around
midnight. The fact only sinks in by degrees. I have to put up a good
front.
Would I have been so hard hit if I hadn't been so sure that the Old
Man's plan would really work out? Naturally, I'd been betting that the
patrol would end in Vigo for both of us. I simply didn't want to admit it
to myself.
Not having shown any enthusiasm for the Old Man's plan right from
the beginning, I can act as though I'd expected nothing but a turndown
all along. No emotionalism. Refused--that's okay with me. But the Chief!
This is a bitter blow, hitting him much harder than it hits me.
In any case, the Old Man has trouble digesting the news. That much
is clear. He seems glad when the two men in trench coats present him with
something else that demands his attention, but he still sits there
thunderstruck. These two oily henchmen, ready to bow and scrape and rub
their hands, turn the scene into a midnight horror play directed for the
crudest effects. The contrasts are too obvious, too gross: the _Weser_'s
dignified Captain and these drunken vultures.
But how do we look ourselves? I stare at the Old Man as if I were
seeing him for the first time. I, after all, am still more or less
decently dressed with my salt-encrusted leather trousers and my halfwashed sweater, but the Old Man looks as if he'd been thrown out of a
poorhouse in the middle of the night. His beard is as shaggy as his hair.
On board, we'd all got used to his rotting sweater, but here in the
bright lights of this paneled room, even I am exasperated by this frayed,
unraveled knitted rag. Only the V neck is still intact. To the right,
over his ribs, there's a hole almost as big as the one for his head. And
his rumpled shirt, the ancient cap, his scarecrow's trousers . . .
For the first time I notice how pale, hollow-eyed, and emaciated he
looks. The Chief too. He wouldn't need any makeup job to play
Mephistopheles. The last few days have really worn him out. This
thirteenth patrol, coming right after the twelfth without any leave, was
a little much for an exhausted man who has far more responsibilities to
bear than any other member of the crew.
The Old Man is openly at pains to demonstrate his refusal to have
anything to do with the two civilians. He's wearing his sourpickle
expression, declines the cigarettes they offer him, and barely answers
them.
I hear that the _Weser_ allowed herself to be interned here at the
beginning of the war. She's now a kind of floating supply depot that is
restocked from time to time with fuel oil and torpedoes. In absolute
secrecy--there has to be strict regard for Spanish neutrality.
I can't get over the secret-agent faces of the two vultures. The
taller is crafty, shy, his eyebrows a single line; low forehead, pomaded
hair, Adolphe Menjou mustache, muttonchops extending below his earlobes.
Much waving of his arms in the air so that his cuffs shoot out and show
the gold cufflinks, The other one has close-set ears, a swarthy face, and
a shifty air. The two of them stink of undercover work a mile off, even
if one calls himself a representative of the naval attaché. Difficult,
apparently, for a spy not to have a face that fits his profession.
I overhear odd snatches and tail ends of dialogue. To crown it all,
we're not even going to be allowed to leave mail. Too risky! It's a
secret operation. . . nothing must be allowed to leak out. We aren't even
supposed to know exactly where Vigo is.
There will be dreadful worries at home. The patrol has already gone
on longer than ever before and god knows how much longer it will be
before we can send any mail. How will the men feel when they're told they
have to hold on to the letters they've been writing so busily during the
last few days?
And the ensign--how will he be able to stand it? I wish I'd never
heard a word of his Romeo and Juliet story. But I can't just go over and
comfort him--treat him as if he's a callow romantic boy.
The chatter of the two vultures seems to reach me through cotton
wool. "One more, just to cure ourselves of the habit, Herr
Kapitänleutnant!"--"That must have been an interesting mission. Herr
Kapitänleutnant."
I'd be missing my guess about the Old Man if he utters anything
more than a mumbled "Yes."
Not even their direct questions about our boat's successes can
elicit any response from the Old Man. He simply narrows his eyes and
glares from one to the other, waits for his silence to unnerve them, and
then says, "Yes."
I can see that his mind is working the whole time, and I can
imagine what's bothering him. Involuntarily, I glance at his hands. He's
clenched them together, the way he always does when he feels
uncomfortable.
Then he signals me with a nod of the head.
"Just stretch my legs a bit," he says to the company.
The sudden change from the warmth of the saloon to the cold night
air takes my breath away. I smell oil--our provisioning. The Old Man
hurries toward the stern with such long strides that I'm barely able to
keep up. When he can go no farther, he turns around abruptly and leans
against the railing. Between the bow of a lifeboat and the black supports
of some iron structure, whose purpose I can't make out, I see the
flickering glow of Vigo: yellow lights, white lights, a few red ones. Two
sparkling necklaces run upward, gradually drawing together--that must be
a street leading up the hill from the harbor.
At the pier lies a destroyer, all its decks lit up. Floodlights
blaze down on a freighter. You can clearly see that her loading cranes
are at work.
A circle of yellow light shines up from below us--the open torpedo
supply hatch. The galley hatch is open too. I hear voices. "They'll never
be any use to me again, these good clothes!"--"Oh, cut the rubbish--get
going. Grab that!"
That was unmistakably the Berliner.
Subdued singing echoes from below decks in the Weser.
I'm excited by the sparkling lights, the rosy-red halos around the
streetlamps over there on the shore. They're surrounded by an aura of
sex. I smell bed, the warm milky smell of skin, the sweetish smell of
powder, the anchovy-sharp smell of cunt, Eau de Javel, sperm.
Interrupted shouts, fragments of commands, the loud banging of
metal.
"What a racket," says the Old Man.
The situation obviously disturbs him. "Those people on the fishing
boat--they must have seen us," he says finally. "And the men on the ship.
Who knows whether they're all reliable? It would be easy enough to flash
a signal from here to shore. In any case, we're going to put to sea
earlier. Not as arranged. And we'll take the same way out. Not the
southern passage they recommended. If only we had more water under our
keel around here . . ."
Blue sparks flash on the shore like a short circuit. Another
trolley. Sounds of chattering borne on the wind, then the honking of cars
and the dull clanking from other ships. Suddenly a deep silence.
"Just where do they get the torpedoes?" I ask the Old Man.
"Other boats deposit them here--the ones on return voyage that
didn't use up their whole quota. They drop in here on a visit, as
suppliers, so to speak. Return voyages are very useful for that. It's the
same for any superfluous fuel oil in their tanks."
"How well has it worked up to flow? After all, we aren't the
first."
"That's just it ... Three boats have already been supplied here.
Two were lost."
"Where ?"
"That's what's not clear. It's perfectly possible there's a Tommy
destroyer on duty, waiting for us off the southern entrance. I don't like
any of this!"
From below we can hear a kind of communal singsong. The First Watch
Officer should be here. Then by way of climax we get the melody of the
"Internationale," but with new words:
Brothers of freedom and sunlight!
Buy condoms cheap at the co-op!
In the pale glow of the distant floodlights I can see the Old Man
grinning. He listens a while longer, then goes on. "They're not nearly
careful enough around here! This is hardly a reliable operation!"
A stab of memory: I realize that somewhere before I've seen a box
of Spanish matches like the ones lying in there on the table.
"Those Spanish matches," I say. "I recognize them."
The Old Man doesn't seem to be listening. I begin again. "A box of
Spanish matches like those, just like the ones on the table in the
saloon, I've seen one before . . ."
"Really?" he says.
"Yes, in La Baule on the table in the Royal. It belonged to
Merten's First Watch Officer."
"So Merten has already been here once--interesting!"
"The box of matches suddenly vanished. But no one admitted to
taking it."
"Interesting," says the Old Man again. "I don't like it at all!"
"And then a box like that turned up another time . . ." But this
doesn't seem to matter to the Old Man. It's enough for him to know that
our method of provisioning hasn't remained as secret as the gentlemen
sitting around the green table imagine. The boxes of matches--perhaps
none of it is that important. Perhaps I'm only imagining things. But
Spanish matches--you can't help noticing-- Spanish matches in France.
I suddenly remember the ensign. Let's hope Ullmann doesn't try
anything silly. Better have a look and see where he is. I pretend that I
have to take a leak and climb over the tower down into the boat. How
shabby it suddenly looks down here!
I encounter Ullmann in the control room. He's helping to stow away
fresh bread. The net that hung low in front of the radio shack when we
put out is being filled up again.
I'm suddenly embarrassed, and can't think what to say to him.
"Well, Ullmann," I manage, and then add, "A pretty mess!"
I'm notoriously unsuited to the role of comforter. The ensign looks
pathetic. How often must he have told himself in the last few hours that
there's no way back from La Spezia to La Baule? What I would really like
to do is take him by the shoulders and give him a thorough shaking.
Instead of which, I do what he's doing, and stare at the pattern of the
floor plates, only able to stammer out, "This is just--this is just
miserable!" The ensign blows his nose. Jesus, he has to pull himself
together. I have an idea. "Ullmann, quick, fetch me your letter . . . Or
do you want to add a line to it? No, better write it over again as of now
with no giveaways in it--got it? I'll see you in ten minutes in the
control room."
It'd be ridiculous, I think, if I can't persuade the Captain of the
_Weser_ . . .
The Old Man is still brooding at the railing, and I stand silent
beside him. Soon a squat shadow appears: the Captain of the Weser. The
Old Man goes through his customary trampling dance, and says, "I've never
been to Spain before."
My thoughts are with Ullmann.
The Captain of the _Weser_ is not a voluble man. He speaks in an
agreeable, cautious fashion, his deep voice tinged with a North German
accent. "We have a Flettner rudder--designed by the same Flettner who
invented the rotor ship. The rotors were a flop, but the rudder has been
a great success. We can turn on a coin. In a narrow harbor that's a big
advantage."
A queer bird--giving us a lecture on his special rudder at a moment
like this.
A dull bumping disturbs the Old Man. The First Watch Officer turns
up. "Just see whether the lines and fenders are properly cleared!" the
Old Man orders.
The wind is freshening quite perceptibly.
"Would the Commander not like to take a bath?" asks the Captain of
the _Weser_.
"Thank you, no."
A man comes up to announce that the meal is served in the saloon
"Let's enjoy it!" says the Old Man, and moves after the Captain.
Once again the change from darkness to the blinding light of the
saloon makes me pause for a moment. The two vultures seem to have got
themselves plastered. Their faces are flushed, their eyes no longer as
alert as they were around midnight.
I steal a glance at my wristwatch: two thirty. I have to sneak out
again and look for the ensign. He slips his letter into my hand, like a
pickpocket passing something to his sidekick.
Meantime the First Watch Officer and the Chief have relieved the
Second Watch Officer and the assistant engineer. It'll probably be five
o'clock before we're ready for departure.
I wish I could stretch out and sleep, but I go back to the saloon.
The two civilians are now being hail-fellow-well-met. The Old Man
has to permit the taller of the two to slap him on the shoulder and
babble, "Sieg Heil and fat booty!"
I almost sink through the floor in humiliation.
Fortunately, when the time comes, there's a companionway instead of
the Jacob's ladder on the way back. Everything has been carefuly blacked
out, so I manage to exchange a few words with the Captain of the Weser,
thereby detaining him so that we lag some way behind the others. I don't
say much. He takes the letter without any fuss. "I'll see to it," he
says.
A gangway has been extended from a lower deck to our bridge. With
one hand propped on the TBT I let myself drop into the bridge cockpit.
There wells up in me a kind of affection for the boat, and I lay both
hands flat against the damp metal of the bulwark. The steel is vibrating:
the diesels are beginning to run.
Commands to cast off. Shouts from above.
The Old Man sees to it that we get away quickly. Already I can
barely make out the waving figures on the Weser.
The port running light of a steamer is suddenly very close. The Old
Man calls for the signal light. What is he up to?
He himself signals over, "Anton, Anton." A hand-held searchlight
flashes back from the steamer.
"B-u-e-n-v-i-a-j-e," the Old Man reads out.
And then he replies, "G-r-a-c-i-a-s."
"Yes, I have foreign languages too!" says the Old Man. And then,
"They saw us--no doubt about it. Now perhaps they'll assume we're polite
Tommies or something of the sort."
Our course is one hundred seventy degrees--almost due south.
The provisioning in Vigo has cheered the men up.
"Went off pretty well--but they could have rounded up some dames
while they were at it!" I hear in the wardroom. "A quick one on the
gangplank!"
"Those guys were absolutely shattered by us! The Old Man in that
sweater of his--it was an act in itself!"
The consternation that reduced them to silence after the Gibraltar
signal seems to have vanished. Now they sound as though they'd wanted the
Mediterranean all along, just to make a change.
Frenssen claims to have had a brother who was in the Foreign
Legion. He describes a desert landscape with date palms and oases, fata
morganas, desert fortresses, and luxuriously equipped whorehouses "with a
thousand women--and boys too--something for everyone!"
Pilgrim starts reminiscing too.
"I had a girl once who was crazy about pants with zippers. Couldn't
control herself, even on the streetcar. Kept grinding her hip against my
fly, zipping it up and down, up and down . . . like the guillotine--makes
a man nervous!"
"So what did you do?" asks Wichmann.
"Do? What the hell can you do? It's like the Grand Old Duke of York
in the nursery rhyme--'when you're up, you're up'. .
"Well, easy come, easy go!"
"You're a real gorilla--no class at all."
Wichmann suddenly gets dreamy. "One of those real leisurely
afternoon fucks--a bit of music--a little something to drink--that's
still the best. You and your slam-bam-thank-you-ma'ams!"
Memories come to mind: lazy lovemaking on rainy afternoons. The
doorbell rings, but we pay no attention. In another world--far from
everyday reality. Curtains half drawn. Landlady out shopping. Only us and
the cat in the apartment.
Later Frenssen and Zeitler quietly and matter of factly discuss the
varying merits of certain postures during intercourse.
"It can drive you crazy sometimes," Frenssen says. "I laid a doll
on the heath once . . . straight up a slope. Christ, was that a job--
uphill, you know--but finally, just as I was coming, I turned the lady
around a hundred and eighty degrees."
He makes a scooping motion with both hands to illustrate the turn.
Later there is whispering back and forth between two bunks. "How do
you feel?"
"How do you think I feel? Doesn't matter a damn where they send us,
does it?"
"Come on, admit it! Do you think I don't know why you've been so
down in the mouth? But, that's all over with now! Don't worry about it. 
Your little girl will be taken care of. After all, she's a very
presentable doll, something like that doesn't get dusty . . ."
The next day a thoughtful atmosphere prevails in the petty
officers' quarters, a few swaggering speeches by Zeitler and Frenssen
notwithstanding. No chitchat from bunk to bunk. It's not going to be
child's play--everyone has realized that by now.
At the midday meal the Old Man begins to talk about the way he
plans our passage past Gibraltar--hesitantly, trying our patience as
usual; anyone would think he was putting his thoughts together for the
first time like pieces of a jigsaw puzzle--that he hadn't spent hour
after hour concocting his plan, weighing the risks, then discarding the
whole project, recombining the elements, weighing the advantages and
disadvantages.
"We'll use the nighttime approach--on the surface. As close as we
possibly can. It'll be a real obstacle race."
Obstacles like destroyers and other patrols, I add silently.
"Then we'll simply dive and let ourselves sink our way past."
I don't dare expose my curiosity with so much as a glance, so I
pretend to understand: perfectly clear--let ourselves sink our way past.
That's the latest style.
The Old Man simply continues to stare straight ahead. He pretends
to be thinking and says no more, as if he'd explained himself fully.
Sink! Not exactly an attractive expression. Makes for a feeling in
the pit of the stomach like a falling elevator. But if the Delphic oracle
wants it that way, that's what we'll do: sink!
The Second Watch Officer doesn't have as good a control over his
face as I do. He seems to have a nervous tic in his eye--it makes him
look as if he's asking questions with his eyelashes--a new, unobtrusive
way of gathering information.
But the Old Man simply leans his head back in his barber-chair
posture. Finally, after two or three minutes, he directs a few
explanations to the finely grained plywood on the ceiling. "You see,
there are two currents in the Strait of Gibraltar: a surface current from
the Atlantic into the Mediterranean and a deeper one that flows in the
opposite direction. And there's quite a bit of push behind them."
He thrusts out his lower lip and sucks in his cheeks, then looks
down and just sits there in silence again.
"Seven-knot current," he finally tosses in, like a tidbit for us to
chew on a while.
Then I see the light. Sink--this time he means horizontally, not in
the usual up and down sense.
Perfectly obvious--and brilliant!
Nothing simpler: Dive, and let yourself be carried through the
strait by the current--no noise, and it saves fuel.
The rules of the game demand that we appear bored. No astonishment.
Don't nod; don't move an eyelash. The Old Man thrusts out his lower lip
again and nods deliberately. The Chief allows himself a sort of lopsided
grin. The Old Man registers this, takes a deep breath, returns to his
barber-chair posture, and asks in unexpectedly official tones, "Well,
Chief, everything clear?"
"_Jawohl_, Herr Kaleun," the Chief replies, nodding vigorously, as
if sheer zeal might keep him at it forever.
There's a tense pause. What the Old Man needs now is an opponent, a
doubter. The Chief gladly obliges. Admittedly, all he says is, "Hm, hm,"
but that's enough to indicate certain reservations. Although all of us--
except the Commander--are now staring expectantly at the Chief, he simply
cocks his head on one side like a blackbird searching for nightcrawlers
in the short grass. He wouldn't think of voicing his doubts--he's just
allowing them to flicker through. That's enough to begin with. He's an
old hand--he takes his time, he dallies--something he learned from the
Old Man.
Our company devotes a good five minutes to this silent game.
Finally the Old Man seems to have had enough. "Well, Chief?" he says
encouragingly. But the Chief's holding up remarkably well. He shakes his
head very gently and delivers his dry curtain line. "Absolutely first
rate, Herr Kaleun! Inspired idea."
I'm amazed at this cold-blooded bastard! And to think that I was
afraid he was close to a nervous breakdown during the last attack.
On the other hand, the Old Man's doing well too, He betrays no
visible reaction whatever; he simply lowers his head and observes his
Chief out of the corner of his eye, as though he had to check on a
patient's state of mind without the patient noticing it. A raising of the
left eyebrow expresses his concern about the invalid: pure drawing-room
comedy.
The Chief pretends to be unaware of the Commander's psychiatric
examination. With superbly mimed indifference he raises his right leg,
clasps his hands under his knee and looks absolutely blank while casually
observing the veins in the woodwork.
Just as the silence threatens to become oppressive, the steward
appears. Even the extras are in good form today, providing the action
when it's time to put an end to the dumb show.
The soup makes its rounds. We spoon it, chew, and are silent.
Once again I notice the fly. She's walking across the photograph of
the C-in-C. Right into his wide-open mouth. Too bad it's not happening in
real life: a black fly the size of a small dumpling straight down his
throat--right at the climax of one of his stemwinding speeches. "Attack--
onward and up . . . ugh--" The fly takes wing and the C-in-C utters only
the first syllable before he chokes. Our fly didn't disembark in Vigo:
she resisted all temptations to become a Spanish fly. Spanish flies--
there are such things! She stayed on board, proved her loyalty _No one_
deserted. We're all still aboard, all present and accounted for, our fly
included. At the same time she's probably the only creature that can come
and go as she pleases. Not bound by the C-in-C's orders the way we are.
An example of spectacular loyalty. Through thick and thin. Very
commendable.
Up in the bow, a kind of opera evening seems to be in progress.
Through the closed hatch come scraps of song. When the hatch clicks open,
there is rousing noise from the compartment:
Here comes the sheik
He's on the make.
This is repeated ad infinitum. Just as I've given up all hope of textual
change, some of them get together on the next verse:
Through the wide, wide wastes of the Sahara
There wanders a sex-crazy crone,
Along comes a filthy old Bedouin
First she screams, then he roars, then they moan.
"It's Arabian week! Probably something to do with the fact that
we're headed south," says the Old Man. "They're singing to pluck up their
courage."
Because the Old Man seems to have some free time after breakfast, I
ask him for some explanations. "This strong current flowing into the
Mediterranean--I don't understand it. Where does all the water come
from?" I have to make up my mind to be patient. The Old Man is never
quick off the mark. First he tilts his head to one side and frowns--I can
see the sentences taking shape.
"Well. . . yes. . . there _are_ quite remarkable conditions there."
Pause. Now the rules require that I fix my eyes on his face to keep
his remarks staggering on.
"You already know that the Mediterranean not only has a current
that flows in but also one that flows out. Two of them, one above the
other: upper one in, lower one out. The reason is that there's
practically no rainfall anywhere in the area. There's endless sunshine,
though--so a lot of water evaporates. And as the salt obviously doesn't
evaporate along with the water, the salt content increases. The saltier
the water, the heavier it is. All clear and logical, isn't it?"
"So far--yes."
The Old Man hangs fire. Dragging on his cold pipe, he behaves as if
the whole theorem were now resolved--QED. Only when I start to get to my
feet does he go on. "The salt solution sinks; it forms the deep water of
the Mediterranean and, with its tendency to seek even greater depth,
flows out through the strait into the Atlantic and settles at about three
thousand feet, where it has the same specific gravity as the surrounding
water. Meanwhile equalization is taking place up above. Less salty water
is flowing from the Atlantic into the Mediterranean, replacing the water
lost through evaporation."
". . . and the deep water that has flowed out."
"Exactly!"
"And what we intend to do is to profit by this sensible
arrangement--i.e., to slip in with the less salty replacement water?"
"It's the only way. . ."
On the Commander's orders I'm standing watch as an additional
lookout.
"Tricky, being this close to land!"
In less than half an hour the port lookout aft roars: "Aircraft at
seventy degrees!"
The Second Watch Officer whirls around to stare in the same
direction as the outstretched arm of the lookout.
I'm already at the tower hatch. As I drop through, I hear the
alarm, immediately followed by the shrilling of the bell. The Chief comes
through the forward hatch in a single bound.
The emergency air exhausts are opened, the red and white hand
wheels spun.
From above, the voice of the Second Watch Officer: "Flood!"
Slowly, as if in the teeth of fierce resistance, the needle of the
depth manometer begins to move.
"All hands forward!" orders the Chief. Falling rather than running,
the crew storms through the control room toward the bow.
The Commander is sitting hunched over the chart chest. I can see
nothing but his bent back. He's the first to move again: He gets up and,
like an angry director, makes a gesture of dismissal with his left hand
while he pushes his right deep into his trouser pocket. "Nothing! Stay
underwater for the time being!" And, to the Second Watch Officer, "Good
work, Second Watch!"
He turns to me. "Good start! We're beginning just fine! We'll make
great progress if it goes on like this."
There's just enough room for me at the chart table for once. I get
a good view of the Gibraltar chart. From the African coast to the British
docks is about seven miles. These docks are the only ones at which the
British Mediterranean fleet can put in for repairs, the only ones that
damaged commercial vessels have at their disposal. The British will do
everything to protect these facilities.
Only seven miles from coast to coast--a narrow corridor, but we
have to slink through it.
The Pillars of Hercules: in the north the Rock of Gibraltar, the
Mountain of Saturn; in the south, on the coast of Spanish Morocco, the
Rock of Avila close to Ceuta.
We will probably have to stick close to the south coast, steal our
way in along the wall, so to speak.
But would that really be a good idea? The Tommies can figure out
for themselves that a German U-boat would hardly sail straight through
their wartime harbor; they'll take measures to protect the other side
accordingly. The Old Man, of course, must have made his plan long ago.
I'm curious to know what course he's worked out.
The Second Watch Officer appears and bends over the chart table
beside me.
"The enchanted meeting place of two seductive climates, where the
mildness and beauty of the Mediterranean world encounter the strength and
sheer immensity of the Atlantic!"
I look at him in amazement.
"That's what it says in the sea manual!" he says indifferently, as
he goes to work with the protractor.
"Seven miles--well, we'll have room!"
"Depth?" I ask.
"Up to thirty-two hundred feet. That's plenty!"
The Chief joins us.
"Once a pack of us attacked a Gibraltar convoy. The ones that were
left must have felt pretty good when they finally saw the Rock. There
were twenty of them when the freighters put to sea. And after we'd
finished, there were only eight left. It was somewhere around here--
perhaps a little to the west."
The lighthouses I find on the chart have foreign names. One is
called Zem Zem. Then there's Cape Saint Vincent. What was that about
Nelson and Cape Saint Vincent?
An hour later we surface again. The First Watch Officer has hardly
mounted his watch when the alarm bell jolts me once more.
"Suddenly came from way up--don't know what type!" Zeitler blurts
out, breathing hard.
"They must have spotted us," the Commander remarks. "We'll stay
underwater a while."
He doesn't leave the control room again, and he's visibly uneasy.
The moment he squats on the chart chest, he seems impelled to get up
again. He's looking his most morose. "Probably it's all part of the outer
defenses."
Another half hour goes by, then the Old Man climbs into the tower
and orders us to surface.
The engines have been running a bare ten minutes when the alarm
bell shrieks again. Its ugly tone no longer pierces me to the very marrow
but it still gives me a violent start.
"If it goes on like this, we'll be stuck here the whole day going
up and down!"
The Old Man continues to pretend indifference, but he knows the
difficulties. Conditions are about as unfavorable as they could possibly
be. After that long period of bad weather, there's barely so much as a
ripple to disturb the surface of the sea. Which means that aircraft will
have no trouble finding us, even without a moon.
The British may not be able to close the strait with underwater
nets, but they'll be putting in every tub they've got that floats.
They've probably known for some time what our Command has in mind.
_Their_ secret service, after all, works.
Letting ourselves drift through the narrows sounds perfectly
plausible, but its only advantage is that the enemy can't actually _hear_
us. It gives us no protection against Asdic.
I witness the control-room mate getting out his escape gear from
behind his bunk. He's visibly upset that I've seen him, and, looking
indignant, immediately throws the gear down on top of his bunk. As if it
had got into his hands by mistake!
Pilgrim comes through, trying to use his body to conceal what he's
carrying. I can hardly believe my own eyes. More escape gear. Funny how
differently people react. Forward in the bow compartment, the "lords" are
acting as though nothing special were afoot, and here the escape gear is
being dug out.
I notice that the bananas we strung up across the control room are
getting yellow. The people over in La Spezia would be delighted. And all
that red wine the crew of the Weser put aboard! The Old Man swore a blue
streak when he discovered the bottles. But he didn't have the heart to
order them thrown over the side.
I decide to take a quick look at things topside. I've hardly stuck
my head out when a fishing boat emerges from a low fogbank.
"Damn close. Must have seen us!"
This is an act we've all sat through before.
The Old Man snorts. Silence for a while. Then he starts theorizing:
"Has to have been a Spaniard."
Let's hope so, I say to myself.
"Well, anyway, there's nothing we can do about it!"
The Portuguese coast looms up. Over the reddish rocks I see a white
house. Looks like Brittany, like the Côte Sauvage at Le Croisic, where a
storm can make the surf explode like shells from the big guns. First a
couple of hollow booms, immediately followed by geysers shooting up
between the black rocks. When the sea is calm and the tide is out, tiny
yellow beaches stretch between the cliffs. Pale-yellow rustling sedge in
the damp bays. Prickly gorse garlanded and festooned with spindrift when
the northwest wind rages against the coast. Deep-worn roads buried in
foam like snow. Pale silver stars of thistles on the sand. Sometimes,
too, a cast-up paravane lost from a mine sweeper. High two-wheeled carts
the farmers use to gather half-dried seaweed together into great piles.
And to seaward the lighthouse painted red and white like our Papenberg.
And now the box of Spanish matches is in my mind again. I knew it
all the time, of course, without being willing to admit it to myself: The
same box with the blazing sun on it--bright yellow on hot red--S imone
kept one in the crocodile handbag she always carried around with her to
hold "_ma vie privée_," as she called it. Once she was rummaging around
in it for a photo she wanted to show me and out fell the match box. She
snatched it up again much too quickly. Why shouldn't I see it? The First
Watch Officer from Franke's boat, who often came into her parents' café,
had given it to her--no, left it behind--no, she had begged it from him .
. suspicion flares again. Simone and the Maquis! Was she disloyal after
all--despite all her assurances? Her constant questioning: "_Quand est-ce
que vous partez?--vers quelle heure?_"--"Oh, ask your friends. They know
our timetable better than we do!"--And then the outbursts of tears, the
pathetic whimpers, the sudden rage. "Mean, mean--_tu es méchant--méchant-
-méchant_!" Smeared makeup, sniffling. The picture of misery.
But why didn't she get one of those pretty little black-lacquered
toy coffins in the mail the way her friends in the house did? Why was
Simone the only person not to get one? Her sorrowful face--all pretense?
No one can put on as good a show as that. Or can they?
I see the wide low bed, the loud rose pattern on the cover, the
twisted fringes, smell Simone's fragrant dry skin. Simone never
perspires. How she loves her delicate taut body, how aware she is of her
every movement.
I sit in the middle of the café not daring to meet her glance. But
when she's moving back and forth between the tables with the agility of a
weasel, looking after her customers, I follow her with my eyes. Light and
graceful as a matador in the ring. The layout of the chairs determines
her figures and passes, gives her the opportunity for constantly new
variations. She avoids these obstacles as she would the horns of a bull,
swaying her hips to one side or drawing in her stomach a little. She
handles her white serving napkin like a cape. I notice that she never
bumps into anything, never so much as touches the corner or the back of a
seat. And her laughter! Tossed out like sparkling coins. Again and again
the violet of her sweater flits into view. In vain I try to keep my eyes
on the newspaper. Who suggested to her this sophisticated combination of
violet sweater and gray slacks--this quite remarkable violet, neither
reddish nor bluish--like a painting by Braque? And on top of it, the
ochrebrown of her face and the blackness of her hair.
A lot of guests in the inn now. They come in thirsty from the
beach. The waitress can't keep up. It's fun to see how Simone catches up
with her at the desk between trips and reproves her, unobtrusively, like
a silently threatening cat.
I can still hear her voice. "We have to be careful!"--"Ach, always
being careful!"--"You must beware; and so must I!"--"Who can stop us?"--
"Don't be stupid. There's so much they can do without 'stopping' us!"--
"But none of it matters!"--"Yes, but we want to survive!"--"Ach, no one's
going to survive!"--"We are."
She meets me at the train in Savenay, has a car from god knows
where, won't let me say a word because she knows I'll start swearing,
drives like a maniac, asks, "Are you afraid? If a military policeman
shows up, I'll step on the gas. They can never shoot straight!"
I hear her on the morning before we put to sea. "Si tu ne turn over
right now and get up--_je te pousse dehors avec mon cul_--with my ass,
_compris?_"
With a lighted cigarette she singes the hair on the calf of my
right leg. "It smells so nice, of a little _cochon!_" She reaches for a
fur-trimmed belt, clamps the end of it under her nose with her curled
upper lip to resemble a mustache, looks in the mirror, and bursts out
laughing. Then she plucks some wool from the fringes of the bedcover and
stuffs it into her nose and ears. And now she tries German. "I am ready
for misleading--I am noxious--_je suis d'accord_--I am very happy for it-
-with it--over it--how do you say that? I could become a nice little
cannibal--_j'ai envie d'être_ seduced. _Et toi?_ And now I'm going to
sing something for you:
Monsieur de Chevreuse ayant declaré que tous
les cocus devraient être noyés,
Madame de Chevreuse lui a fait demander
s'il était bien sur de savoir nager!"*
[*"Monsieur de Chevreuse, having declared that all
cuckolds ought to be drowned, Madame de Chevreuse
put the question to him as to whether he was
perfectly sure he knew how to swim!"]
All play-acting? Pure deception? The Mata Hari of La Baule?
And again, the morning we left. Simone crouching motionless at the
table, shoulders hunched, staring at me: eyes swimming, mouth filled with
half-chewed roll, butter, and honey.
"Go ahead and eat!"
Obediently she begins to chew. Tears pour down her cheeks. One
hangs from her nose. It's cloudy. I notice that especially. Probably the
salt. Salt tears. "Now eat. Be good!" I take her by the back of the neck
like a rabbit, pushing her hair up with the back of my hand. "Come on
now, eat, for heaven's sake. Stop worrying!"
The heavy sweater--thank god for the white sweater with its cable
pattern. Gives me something to talk about. "Lucky you finished the
sweater. I'll be able to make good use of it. It's really cold outside
these days!"
She sniffles. "It's fantastic--the wool--absolutely the exact
amount. Only one little piece left over." She shows me how much by
spreading her thumb and index finger. "Not even four sous' worth! What do
you say to sweaters in the Navy? Something like happy? Or faithful? Are
you happy with your sweater? Will you be faithful to it?"
She sniffles again, holds her breath, laughs through her tears.
Brave. She's well aware that it's not going to be any picnic. You can't
feed her tall stories the way you can to the women at home. She always
knows when a boat is missing. But how? By accident? The evidence? There
are, after all, a hundred "legitimately" possible ways of finding out.
"Lords" who once used to be regular customers all of a sudden don't turn
up any more. And of course the French cleaning women in the billets know
when a crew has gone to sea and when, according to all expectations, they
should be back. There is far too much talk everywhere. And yet, and yet.
. .
The old Breton clock shows six thirty. But it's ten minutes fast. A
reprieve. The driver will be here in ten minutes. Simone goes to work on
my jacket. "You have a spot here, _cochon!_"
She cannot grasp that I'm going aboard dressed this way.
"What d'you think it is? A pleasure boat?"
I have stored up every word. "I come with you to the channel!" "No,
you mustn't do that. Besides, it's cordoned off!"--"I'll get through just
the same, I'll borrow a nurse's pass. I want to see you run out!"--
"Please don't. It could cause trouble. You know when we're leaving. You
can see us from the beach half an hour later."-- "But you'll be no more
than a matchstick!"
Again the word "match." The red and yellow box. I strain my memory,
seize hold of something: the bridge table with the brown cigarette holes
burned in the light plumwood veneer. It's easy to recall the _trompel'oeil_ pattern of the tiles on the floor, which either make clearly
defined cubes placed on end or negative geometric indentations, depending
on whether you look at a white or a black tile first. . . The gray ashes
in the hearth . . . Outside the squealing of brakes. Then a horn. The
driver in field gray--naval artillery.
Simone runs the flat of her hands over the new sweater. She huddles
up so small against me that she doesn't even reach my chin. Also, I'm
wearing my big seaboots.
"Why do you have such big boots?"
"They have cork soles and are lined and besides ..." I hesitate for
a moment but her laughter and her amazement encourage me to go on.
"Besides, they have to be big enough to let you kick them off in the
water without any trouble." I quickly clasp her head and run my fingers
through her hair. "Well now, don't make a scene!"-- "Your bag? Where is
your bag? Have you noticed all the things I packed into it? The parcel is
something you mustn't open until you're at sea, _ja?_ Promise!"--"I
promise!"--"And you'll wear your sweater, too?"--"Every day, whenever
we're outside.' And when I go to sleep I'll pull the collar up and feel
at home!"
I'm thankful everything is so down to earth.
"D'you need hand towels?"--"No, they have them on board. And leave
half of that soap out. They have saltwater soap on board."
I look at the clock. The car has been standing outside for five
minutes. We still have to pick up the Chief. If only it were all over! .
. . It ends very fast. The garden gate at hip level, the turpentine smell
of pine trees. Turn around one more time. Slam the gate. Over--_fini!_
Night is falling quickly. The last light from the sky shimmers and
fades in our wake.
"Well, Kriechbaum, what sort of feeling d'you have about this?" the
Commander asks the navigator.
"Good!" he says without hesitation. But didn't his voice sound
forced?
Another half hour--then the Commander sends me below, along with
the three lookouts. He wants no one but the navigator up there. That must
mean we're already very close to where he assumes the ring of defenses
are.
I hear the electric motors being put into gear. The pounding of the
diesels stops; now we're running on the surface with our motors,
something we've never done before.
"Ship's time?" the Commander calls down.
"20.30 hours," the helmsman calls back.
I remain in the control room. A half hour passes. The motors run
with so little noise that all I have to do is stand under the tower, and
I can hear everything the Commander says.
"Good god--the Tommies've actually called up half the fleet! They
can't _all_ be going to the casino in Tangier! Watch that one over there,
Kriechbaum. Let's hope we don't run anyone over."
The Chief appears beside me, also glancing upward.
"Damned difficult!" he says.
Going by nothing but their navigation lights, the Old Man has to
figure out the course and speed of the enemy ships, present our narrow
silhouette to one patroling vessel after another and try to outmaneuver
them. Damn hard to know at once which light belongs to which ship,
whether the scow has stopped or is going away at an angle of a hundred
ten degrees--or perhaps coming toward us at seventy.
Nor can the helmsman relax for an instant. He makes his return
report in hushed tones. But the Old Man's voice has relaxed. I know him:
He's in his element now.
"Such a decent bunch of people; they've set their navigation lights
properly--nice of them! Kriechbaum, what's your little tub doing? Getting
closer?"
The boat seems to be going round in circles. I must pay more
attention to the orders to the helmsman.
"Shit! That was a close one!"
The Commander is silent for a while. Sticky work. A pulse beats
high in my throat.
"That's right, my boy, just run along that way!" I hear at last.
"What a mob! But they're doing the best they can! Whoops, who's that
coming over there? Steer ninety degrees to port."
I'd give a lot to be on the bridge now.
"Navigator, keep your eye on that vessel headed across our bow--
yes, that one over therel--report if she changes course!"
Suddenly he orders both motors stopped. I strain my ears. The Chief
snorts. What now?
The slapping of the waves against the buoyancy tanks sounds much
too loud. Like wet wash cloths. The boat rocks back and forth. My
questioning glance at the Chief remains unanswered. All the lights in the
control room have been shaded, so I can only see his face as a pale slab.
I hear him shift his weight twice in sheer excitement.
_Tschjumm--tschjumm_: the waves slap against the side.
Relief: the Old Man finally has the port motor started. For a good
ten minutes we make very little headway; we seem to be sneaking along on
tiptoe.
"We'd have caught that one!" comes from above. The Chief lets out
his breath.
The Old Man orders the starboard motor started too. Have we already
wormed our way through the heavy outer defenses? And what if the Tommies
have set up a whole series of systems, not just one? "They can hardly
have set up boom blockades," says the Old Man. "Far too much current."
Where are we anyway? A glance at the chart? No, not now. No time for it.
"Well, Kriechbaum, exciting, isn't it?"
The Old Man is talking loudly up there, totally unconcerned.
"Steady as we are! What's our interloper doing now?"
Unfortunately, I can barely hear the navigator. Tension must have
constricted his breathing; he answers in a whisper.
The Old Man changes course yet again. "Just a little closer! It's
working out all right. They probably aren't reckoning on us turning up!
Be sure the scow over there stays well clear of us--okay?"
For a good five minutes there's nothing from above but two orders
to the helmsman.
Then: "In ten minutes we dive!"
"All right with me," murmurs the Chief.
For the time being, however, despite the Old Man's announcement,
the Chief stays put. Is he trying to demonstrate how sure of himself he
is? There's no question about it: the boat has been perfectly trimmed.
All the systems that are his responsibility have been carefully tested
during the last few hours. The control-room mate hasn't had any rest at
all.
". . . well, who says . . . that's the way . . . now behave
yourselves . . ."
The Old Man sounds as if he's talking to a child who won't finish
his food.
"Well, we'll just take a look!" says the Chief at last and
disappears.
I have a sudden thought: Quick! Get to the can! Opportunities may
become rare.
I'm in luck--stateroom H is free.
In the can it's like squatting inside a machine. There's no
woodwork in here to conceal the mind-boggling tangle of pipes. You can
barely move between the narrow walls. And to make things even more
difficult, the bosun has crammed canned goods from the Weser into every
inch of space between the mops and pails.
While I'm exerting myself, I remember the description of a seaman
in the latrine of a damaged vessel during a storm, whose job was to keep
slowly pouring oil: This oil would flow out through the drain and
supposedly calm the surface of the waves. The steamer was listing
heavily, so the latrine lay just about at the water line. Whenever the
ship heeled too far over, water rushed through the drain into the latrine
and kept on rising. The door wouldn't open, because a bolt on the outside
had slid shut, and the seaman knew that he would drown if the ship rolled
any farther. He couldn't even hope that air would be trapped near the
ceiling and resist the water pressure, for latrines are traditionally
well ventilated--normal ships' latrines, that is, not a U-boat's.
So there he was, caught like a mouse in a trap, and he went on
pouring oil whenever the drainpipe stopped spouting sea water: a lonely
man on an abandoned post fighting for his ship.
Instantly I'm seized by the most humiliating claustrophobia. We
might have a diving accident. The batteries might explode, and this
damned heavy iron catch never open again--bent by the explosion. I see
myself banging on the door in despair: no one to hear me.
Scenes from movies flash through my mind: a car hurtling into a
river, trapping its passengers. Agonized faces behind the bars of a
burning penitentiary. A theater gangway jammed withpanic-stricken mobs.
My bowels seize up; I get to my feet and try to concentrate on the drips
of condensation hanging from the lower edge of a gleaming silver potash
cartridge that's stored in a container behind the toilet.
I pretend to be calm and pull up my trousers with deliberate
slowness. But then my hands begin to work faster than I want them to,
pumping the toilet empty. Get the door open fast! Get out! Breathe deep!
Jesus!
Fear? Was that just fear, common, ordinary fear, or was it
claustrophobia? When have I experienced real fear? In the air raid
shelter? Not really. After all, there was no question but that we'd be
dug out eventually. Once in Brest--when the bombers suddenly came--I ran
like a rabbit. It was quite a performance. But genuine fear?
In Dieppe, on the mine sweeper? That crazy rise and fall of the
tide. We'd already picked up one mine; when the alarm suddenly went off,
the wall of the pier was as high as a four-story house, and we were lying
in the mud on the bottom of the harbor basin, with the bombs beginning to
fall and nowhere to go.
But all of that was nothing compared to my fear in the endless
echoing corridors of the boarding school on Sundays, when most of the
students had gone home--hardly anyone in the huge building. People
chasing me, knives in their hands, fingers curling to seize me by the
neck from behind. Pursuing footsteps pounding after me in the corridor.
Horror behind my back--unceasing fear. The torment of school: In the
middle of the night I'd start up out of my sleep, sticky between my
thighs, positive I must be bleeding to death. No light. There I'd lie,
rigid with terror, paralyzed by the fear that I'd be murdered if I so
much as moved.
X GIBRALTAR
Changeover. There's a lot of pushing and shoving because men from
the second watch are still standing around in the control room, while
those on the third are beginning to turn up. The Berliner can't
understand why we still haven't dived. "With the Old Man it's all or
nothing. No half measures!"
Tension has loosened their tongues. Three or four of them are
talking at once. "Boy, that's quite an idea!"--"It's really working
out!"--"How are things in the shop?"--"We're making out."
Zeitler runs his comb through his hair.
"That's it--fix yourself up," says the Berliner. "They say a lot of
the Tommies are queer."
Zeitler pays no attention.
Turbo sings softly to himself.
I stand under the hatchway, sou'wester fastened under my chin,
right hand on the ladder, looking up. "Permission to come on the bridge?"
But the Commander roars, "ALARM!"
The navigator comes sliding down the ladder. His seaboots land
close beside me with a bang. Uproar from above.
The Commander--where in the world is the Commander?
I'm about to open my mouth when a dreadful explosion catches me in
the knees. God, my eardrums! I stagger against the chart chest. Someone
shouts, "The Commander! The Commander!" And someone else, "We've been
hit! Artillery shell!"
A heavy cascade descends on us. No more light. Ears deafened. Fear.
The boat has already started to tilt. Then the Commander lands
smack in the middle of us like a heavy sack. Groaning with pain, all he
manages to say is, "Hit, right beside the tower!"
In the beam of a flashlight I see him bent over backward, his hands
pressed against his kidneys.
"Cannon's gone!--Almost blew me out!"
Somewhere in the darkness in the after half of the control room,
someone is screaming shrilly--like a woman.
"It was a bee--direct attack," the Commander gasps.
I feel the boat sinking fast. A bee? A bee? In the middle of the
night? Not an artillery shell but a plane--impossible!
An emergency light goes on.
"Blow the tanks!" roars the Commander. "Blow them all!" And then in
a whiplash voice, "Surface at once! Break out life-saving gear!"
I stop breathing. Two, three terrified faces in the half darkness
of the after-hatch frame. All movement ceases,
The Commander groans, panting.
_In the same hour came forth fingers of a man's hand, and wrote
upon the plaster of the wall of the king's palace_ . . . A bee--that's
impossible!
Bow heavy? Much too bow heavy? Cannon gone! How can the cannon have
vanished?
"A hit beside the tower," like an oath from the Old Man, and then
louder, "What's wrong now? God Almighty! When am I going to get some
reports?"
In answer there's a chorus of cries from astern. "Breach in the
diesel room!"--"Breach in the motor room!"--Four, five times the dread
word "breach" in the hubbub of shouting, half drowned by the hissing of
compressed air streaming into the tanks.
Finally the hand of the depth manometer stops, trembles violently,
and then slowly moves backward. We're rising.
The Commander is now standing under the tower. "Move it, Chief!
Surface immediately! No periscope survey! I'm going onto the bridge
alone. Keep everything at the ready!"
Icy terror. I don't have my escape gear with me. I stagger toward
the after hatch, force my way between two men who don't want to move,
then my hands reach the foot of my bunk and seize the thing.
The compressed air goes on hissing and there's wild confusion in
the control room. So as not to be in the way, I crouch beside the forward
hatch.
"Boat breaking surface--tower hatch free!" the Chief reports, his
head tilted upward, so matter of factly he might as well be out on
maneuvers. The Old Man is already in the tower. He pushes the hatch open
and the commands begin. "Both diesels full speed ahead! Hard a-starboard!
Steer one hundred eighty degrees!" His voice is harsh and grating.
Go overboard? Swim? I fasten my compressed-air tank, hastily fumble
about with the catches on my life jacket. The diesels! This noise! How
long can things keep on like this? I count the seconds half aloud amid
the babble of voices coming through the after hatch.
What's the Old Man got in mind? One hundred eighty degrees-- south!
We're running straight for the African coast.
Someone roars, "Port diesel's failed!" All that mad noise of
machinery--is it really just _one_ diesel?
A sudden flash in the circle of the tower hatch makes me look up.
Beside me the Chief's face is illuminated by the blinding magnesium
glare.
"Star shells!" he snaps. It sounds like a bark.
The roar of the diesel is driving me mad. I want to block my ears
and drown out the hammering of the explosions in the cylinders. Better
still, open my mouth, the way I learned in the artillery; there may be
another shot at any moment.
I hear myself counting. While I'm murmuring numbers, a new panic
cry comes from astern. "E-motor bilge making water fast . . ."
I've never swum with escape gear. Not even in practice. How close
are the patrol boats? Much too dark--no one will see us in the water. As
for the current--it's powerful; the Old Man has said so himself. It'll
drive us apart. If we have to swim, we've had it. The surface current
flows out of the Mediterranean, so that means straight into the Atlantic.
And no one will find us there. Nonsense. I'm all wrong: It pushes us into
the Mediterranean. Surface current. . . undercurrent. Count--go on
counting! Seagulls. Those hooked beaks. Gelatinous flesh. Skulls picked
white and covered in slime. . .
Reeling off numbers I get to three hundred eighty when the
Commanders roars "ALARM!" again.
He comes down the ladder, left foot, right foot, perfectly normal--
normal, that is, except for his voice. "The bastards are shooting flares-
-shitting them!" He brings his voice under control. "It's like daylight
up there!"
What now? Are we _not_ going overboard after all? What's he got in
mind? The reports from aft seem to make no impression on him.
The bow heaviness jams me back against the forward wall of the
control room. With the palms of my hands I can feel the cold damp lacquer
behind me. Am I wrong, or are we descending faster than usual? Sinking
like a stone!
All hell breaks loose. Men stagger into the control room, slip,
fall full length. One of them hits me in the stomach with his head as he
goes down. I haul him to his feet. Don't recognize who he is. In the
confusion have I missed the order "All hands forward!"?
The needle! It goes on turning. . . but the boat was balanced for a
hundred feet. One hundred feet: It ought to have slowed down long ago. I 
concentrate on it--then it disappears into a blue haze. Puffs of smoke
are forcing their way into the control room from aft.
The Chief jerks his head around. In that fraction of a second I see
real horror in his face.
The needle . . . it's moving much too fast.
The Chief gives a hydroplane order. The old trick--hold the boat
dynamically. Exert pressure on the hydroplanes with E-motors. But are
they running full speed? I can't hear the usual humming. Are they running
at all?
The nightmare pushing and sliding drowns out everything else. And
the whimpering--who can that be? No one is recognizable in this miserable
half-light.
"Forward hydroplane jammed!" the hydroplane operator reports
without turning round.
The Chief is holding the beam of his inspection lamp trained on the
depth manometer. Despite the smoke I can see that the pointer is moving
quickly on: i6o . . . 190 . . . \Vhen it goes past 225 the Commander
orders, "Blow the tanks!" The sharp hiss of compressed air soothes my
jangled nerves. Thank god, now at last the scow will regain some of her
buoyancy.
But the pointer continues to turn. Of course, it has to--that's
normal: It'll keep turning until the boat's tendency to fall is changed
into a tendency to rise. That always takes time.
But now--it _has_ to stop! My eyes close tight shut, but I force
them open, stare at the depth manometer. The pointer hasn't the slightest
intention of coming to a halt. It goes right on . . . 250. . . 300 feet.
I put all my will power into my stare, try to arrest the thin black
strip of metal. No use: It passes the 325 mark and keeps going.
Perhaps the buoyancy from our compressed-air cylinders is not
enough?
"Boat out of control, can't hold her," whispers the Chief.
What was that? Can't hold--can't hold? The breaches in the hull . .
. Have we become too heavy? Are we finished? I go on crouching beside the
hatch.
At what depth will the pressure hull be crushed? When will the
steel skin between the ribs be ripped apart?
The pointer passes 375. I no longer dare look at it. I push myself
up, searching for handholds. Pressure. One of the lessons the Chief has
drummed into me shoots through my head: At great depths the pressure of
the water reduces the actual volume of the boat. Hence the boat gains
excess weight compared to the water it displaces. So the more we are
compressed, the heavier we get. No more buoyancy, only gravitational
pull, and an increased rate of descent.
"Six hundred!" the Chief announces. "Six twenty-five--six fifty. .
."
The report echoes in my skull: six hundred fifty, and we're still
falling!
My breathing stops. Any moment now there'll be the screaming tear.
And then the green cataracts.
Where will it start?
When water breaks through, something tells me, it starts with a
single jet.
The whole boat groans and cracks: a sharp report like a pistol
shot, then a hollow strident singing that makes my blood run cold. It 
gets shriller and shriller, a hellish sound, like a high-speed circular
saw.
Again a sharp report and more cracking and groaning.
"Passing eight hundred!" a strange voice cries. My feet go out from
under me. I'm just able to catch myself by the halyard of the sky
periscope. The thin wire rope cuts painfully into the palm of my hand.
So this is the way it is.
The pointer will soon reach 825. Another crack of the whip.
Realization dawns: Those are rivets popping. The boat is welded and
riveted, and this pressure is more than such rivets and welding can
stand.
The flanges! Those goddam outboard plugs!
A voice chants, "Turn not Thine eyes and Thy countenance from me."
The Bible Scholar? Why the crowd in the control room? Who's fouling
everything up around here?
Suddenly a hard blow knocks me off my feet. I roll forward, put my
hand on someone's face, pull myself up against a body in a leather
jacket. Out of the forward hatch come screams, and then, like an echo,
more screams from aft. Cracking and clattering, the floor plates are
repeatedly flung upward. Cascading noise of glass shattering, as if a
Christmas tree had fallen over. Another heavy blow with a droning echo--
and another. And now a high-pitched screech that saws straight through my
body. The boat vibrates madly, shuddering under a series of dull blows as
though we were being dragged across an enormous field of rubble. From
outside comes a monstrous groaning howl--then a mad screeching, two more
resounding blows. And suddenly it's all over. Except for a high-pitched
whistle.
"We have arrived!" The clearly articulated words seem to be coming
through a distant door. The Commander.
Lying on my back, I wriggle until my legs with their heavy boots
are under me, wrestle myself up, twist, lose my footing, fall to my
knees. A cry rises in my throat. I choke it back just in time.
Light! What's happened to the light? The emergency supply-- why
does no one turn it on? I can hear the gurgling of water. Is that the
bilge? Water from the outside wouldn't gurgle.
I try to separate out the sounds and locate them. Cries, whispers,
murmurs, the high note of panic, questions from the Old Man. "Where are
my reports?" And immediately thereafter, imperiously, "I demand proper
reports!"
Light at last! Half-light. Just what are all these people doing
here? I blink, hood my eyes, try to penetrate the semi-darkness, catch
fragments of words and a shout or two. The racket seems to be loudest
aft. Christ! What exactly has happened?
Sometimes it's the Old Man's face in front of me, sometimes the
Chief's. More snatches of reports. Sometimes a whole sentence, sometimes
mere fragments of words. Men rush past me toward the stern, their eyes
wide with terror. One bumps into me, almost knocking me down.
"A shovelful of sand"--where did those words come from? The Old
Man, of course.
"A shovelful of sand under our keel!"
I try to understand: It must have been dark on the surface. Not
pitch black, but not moonlit either. No flyer could possibly have
discovered us in that gloom. Aerial bombardment at night_that never
happens. Perhaps it was an artillery shell after all? Naval artillery? 
Land-based artillery? But the Old Man _did_ roar, "A bee!" And the
droning just before the detonation?
The Chief drives his men from pillar to post, barking out orders.
And then? "We have arrived!" Field of rubble--the pressure hull--
we're as defenseless as a raw egg! The mad screeching--a streetcar
rounding a curve. Of course: We ran full speed into the rocks on the
bottom. What else could it have been? Both motors full speed ahead and
our nose down. To think the boat could stand all that: the steel
stretched to tearing point by the pressure, and then the impact itself.
Three, four men are lying on the floor. The Old Man stands like a
dark mass under the tower, one hand on the ladder.
Clear as a bell over the confused roaring of orders, I hear the
droning song of the Bible Scholar:
Glorious, glorious that day,
When, no more sin, no more dismay,
We march into the Promised Land . . .
He gets no further. A flashlight blazes out. The control-room mate
fetches him a jarring blow on the mouth with his right hand. It sounds as
though the man's front teeth have been broken. Through the haze I see his
wide, astonished eyes and blood streaming from his mouth.
The smallest movement hurts. Somewhere I must have struck my right
shoulder as well as both my shinbones. Each time I move, I seem to be
wading laboriously through water.
In my mind's eye I see a cross-section of the Strait of Gibraltar:
on the right the African coast: tectonic plates descending toward the
middle of the sea bed; and halfway down the slope between the African
coast and the deepest part, our tiny tube.
The Old Man--that maniac--was he hoping against all better judgment
that the British would be off-guard? Wasn't it obvious what massive
defenses would have been prepared against our arrival? There he stands,
one hand on the ladder, the crumpled cap on his head.
The First Watch Officer's mouth is open, his face a single,
horrified question mark.
Where's the Chief? He's disappeared.
The sound man reports, "Sound gear's gone dead!"
The two hydroplane operators remain seated at the control table as
though there were still something to control.
The graduated circle of the sky periscope dangles from its wire.
Funny--that happened to us once before! There must be some better way of
making them. This, let's face it, is a botched job.
For the first time I notice a sharp whistling and hissing from
forward: water break in the foreship too? Cracked and leaking flanges!
What sort of plugs are there in the foreship anyway? The pressure hull
must have held, otherwise it would all be over by now. A leak through a
tear--that goes faster.
Sank like a stone. A miracle that our back wasn't broken as we
banged and rattled down. And that crash landing at some mad depth for
which we were never designed! I feel a sudden respect for our tube and
its powers of resistance. Thin steel, but first-class. Special quality.
Superbly well made.
Suddenly I understand. The Old Man has got our leaking vessel into
shallower water. Turning south! A short sprint in the direction of the 
Coast and the Old Man has saved us. Hats off! Bet everything on one card
and charge full ahead on one diesel. A moment's hesitation and the ground
we're now resting on would have been unreachable.
But what's that? Instead of the high forced singing sound, I can
now hear quite clearly a strange _vitschivitschivitsch_.
I strain my ears. That's the sound of propellers. No doubt about
it--and getting closer.
The sound makes everyone stop dead as though touched by a magic
wand. Now they've got us. The killers! They're directly overhead.
I lower my head, hunch my shoulders, and look at the rigid figures
out of the corner of my eye. The Old Man is gnawing his lower lip.
Forward and aft they must have heard it too: the sound of voices has
stopped at a single stroke.
_Under the gun!_ Looking straight into the muzzle of a pistol. When
will the finger tighten around the trigger?
No motion, not the quiver of an eyelid. Like pillars of salt.
_Vitschivitschivitschivitschivitsch_.
That's only a single propeller: _vitschivitschivitschivitsch_.
Unchanged. The high-pitched singsong plucks at my nerves. The vessel up
there is running at slow speed, otherwise we wouldn't be able to hear the
splashing sounds. A turbine engine, no piston strokes.
But, after all, he can't just remain directly over our heads with
his propeller going! After a while this swishing will have to fade.
Christ, what does it mean?
I can't see the Old Man's face: that would involve pushing my way
forward and I don't dare do it. Just stay still, muscles taut. Bated
breath.
There--the Old Man has just muttered something in his deep bass.
"Lap of honor--they're doing their lap of honor," and I understand. The
vessel up there is turning in a circle, as tight as it possibly can,
right over us. With full rudder. Marking out a funnel. And we are the
point of that funnel.
They know exactly where we are.
The swishing grows no weaker, no stronger. Somewhere beside me, I
hear a grinding of teeth, then a choked sigh. Then another-- more of a
smothered groan.
Lap of honor! The Old Man is right: they're waiting for us to come
up. All they need now is some bit of proof--pieces of wreckage, oil, a
few fragments of flesh.
But why don't the swine drop any bombs?
I hear water dripping. No one moves. Again the growling voice of
the Old Man. "Lap of honor!" And again, "Lap of honor!" Someone whimpers.
That must be the Bible Scholar again.
The words fill my skull. Long-distance bicycle races in Chemnitz.
The mad thrashing of legs. Then the slow pedaling with uplifted, waving
hand, a huge golden wreath slung over one shoulder and across the chest--
the victor! Lap of honor! At the end, brilliant fireworks, and the crowd
busily winding their way homeward to the streetcar station like a great
black earthworm.
_Vitschivitschivitsch_. . .
Reports from astern, whispered from mouth to mouth. I don't catch
them; all I hear is the beating of the propeller. It fills my whole body.
I become a drum resonating under the unvarying throb of the screws.
The Bible Scholar keeps on whimpering. We all look away from one
another, stare at the floor plates or the walls of the control room as
though expecting pictures to be projected on them. Someone says, "Jesus!"
and the Old Man laughs hoarsely.
_Vitschivitschivitsch_ . . Everything seems far away. A misty veil
in front of my eyes. Or is it smoke? Are we on fire again someplace? My
eyes focus. But the bluish haze remains. Yes, smoke! But god knows where
from!
I hear the words, "oil spouting!" Good god, must there be an oil
leak too? I see brilliant smears, serpentine Art Nouveau configurations,
marbled end papers, Icelandic moss .
I try to calm myself. The current--it may be a blessing. Wash away
the iridescent slick and disperse it.
But what good will that do? The Tommies know the current. They're
at home here. They'll take it into account in their calculations; they
weren't born yesterday. God knows how much oil has spouted up from our
bunkers. But if a lot has escaped, perhaps it's a good thing. The more
the better: the Tommies will think they've actually finished the job.
Which tank can have cracked?
Once again everything inside me begins to spin. I want to escape,
smash out of the encircling jungle of pipes and machinery, flee the
valves and apparatus that are no longer of any use. I suddenly feel a
bitter cynicism. After all, this is exactly what you wanted. You were up
to your neck in easy living. You wanted to try something heroic for a
change. "To stand for once before the ineluctable You got drunk on it
all. ". . . where no mother cares for us, no woman crosses our path,
where only reality reigns, grim in all its majesty . . ." Well, this is
it, this is reality.
I can't keep this up for long. Already self-pity is mounting and I
find myself muttering, "Shit, you goddam shit!"
The propeller scratching is so loud that no one can hear me. My
heart is thumping in my throat. My skull is threatening to explode.
Waiting.
Wasn't that something scraping lightly along the boat--or am I
raving?
Waiting--waiting--waiting.
Never before have I known what it's really like to be without some
weapon in my hand. No hammer to strike out with, no wrench to throw my
weight behind.
The _vitschivitsch_ up there isn't getting any fainter.
Unbelievable! Why no Asdic?
Perhaps they don't have it on board. Or perhaps we're lying in a
hollow? In such a position that they can't single us out? In any case, we
didn't land on sand, that's for sure. That howling and screeching came
from scraping along rocks.
The Commander inhales loudly, then mutters, "Incredible! A straight
dive, right out of the darkness!" So it's the airplane he's thinking
about.
I hold my breath for as long as I can, then gulp spasmodically. My
teeth are forcibly torn apart, and with a single wheezing inhalation I
pump myself full of air. Once more I hold my breath, compress it, force
it down--renewed choking in my throat.
When will the bombs come? How long are those swine going to go on
playing with us? My stomach contracts. They wouldn't even need to use 
their ejector. They could simply roll a canister overboard--quite
casually, like an unwanted barrel.
From the stern come whispered reports to the control room. The Old
Man seems to be paying no attention.
". . . surface bomb--contact detonator--directly beside the boat--
level with the cannon--incredible--so dark--and yet!" I hear him
muttering to himself.
Madness, forcing us through these narrows. It had to go wrong . . .
Anyone could work that much out. And the Old Man knew it! Has known it
all along, ever since the radio orders to break through. The moment he
read that signal, he knew we were already half done for. That was why he
wanted to disembark the two of us in Vigo.
What's he talking about now?
Everyone in the control room has heard him. "Polite bunch-- doing
their victory march!"
The sarcasm works. The men raise their eyes, begin to move again.
Gradually action resumes in the control room. Hunched over and on tiptoe,
two men make their way, swaying, toward the stern.
I stare blankly at the Old Man: both hands deep in the pockets of
his fur-lined vest, right foot on a rung of the ladder. Caught in the
beam of a flashlight, he's visible to one and all, and it's obvious that
he's lost none of his casualness. He even offers us a condescending shrug
of the shoulders.
Somewhere there's a clatter of tools. "Quiet!" snaps the Commander.
Gurgling in the bilge. It must have been going on for some time but this
is the first time I've noticed it. It startles me: We're lying still. So
how can the bilge be gurgling? Shit, the water must be rising under the
floor plates.
The Old Man continues his repertory heroics. "They're taking care
of us. What more can one ask?"
Then the gruesome whirring begins to fade. Unquestionably the
vessel is moving away. The Commander turns his head this way and that,
the better to pick up the fading sound. I'm just about to take a deep
breath when the swish of the propeller comes back at its old strength.
"Interesting," mutters the Old Man, and nods his head at the Chief.
All I hear of their whispering is, "Didn't withstand it--upsurge of oil--
yes--"
Then the Old Man hisses to the navigator, "How long have they been
riding that merry-go-round?"
"A full ten minutes, Herr Kaleun!" Kriechbaum whispers back. He
doesn't move as he answers; only his head turns a few degrees to one
side.
"Blessings be upon them!" says the Commander.
The Second Engineer, I now notice for the first time, is no longer
here. Probably disappeared toward the stern. All hell must have broken
loose there, but there were also disaster reports from the bow. I didn't
catch them all. Lucky we have two engineers on board. That's rare: two on
one boat. Luck--we're in luck! We plunge to the bottom, and the dear Lord
slips a shovelful of sand under our keel. And on top of that, two
engineers. Our cup overfioweth!
The Old Man makes a face. "Where's the Second Engineer?"
"In the motor room, Herr Kaleun!"
"Have him test the battery."
Suddenly there seems to be trouble in every quarter at once. I
become conscious of a shrill whistling that has been in my ears for some
time. It must be coming from the diesel room. The water leak. Our stern
heaviness. After all, we hit bow on, but the ship is noticeably stern
heavy, so water must be rising aft. Then why not trim forward? Normally
we would be running the bilge pumps by now. But the main bilge pump is
broken and, besides, would it be able to function against the enormous
outside pressure? Nine hundred feet! _No boat has ever been this deep!_
Our pump certainly wasn't built for it. I glance through the hatch toward
the stern. What's wrong in the petty officers' quarters? Why is it so
crowded? Emergency light . . . can't see a damn thing.
The Old Man is leaning against the shiny silver shaft of the sky
periscope. I can see the horizontal expanse of his thigh but not what
he's sitting on. His right hand is massaging his kneecap as though it
hurt. His cap is perched halfway down the back of his neck, leaving his
tangled hair free.
Suddenly his face goes tense. He puts both hands behind him and
pushes himself to his feet. His voice is no longer a whisper as he asks
the Chief, "How much water have we taken? Which buoyancy cells are
damaged? Which can't be blown? Can we pump out the water already on
board?"
The questions rain down. "What's wrong with the main bilge pump?
Can it be fixed? If we blow out all undamaged buoyancy tanks and cells
completely, will that give us enough buoyancy?"
The Old Man moves his shoulder as if trying to loosen his back
muscles, then takes two or three aimless steps. The control-room mate
also begins to move again.
I wrack my brains: we have three-compartment construction. Well and
good. But what use is that now? If the Old Man were to have the controlroom hatch toward the stern shut--just assuming, since it's no use to us
right now--and if we then made the hatch airtight, the control room and
foreship would stay nice and dry. No doubt about it. Then all we'd have
to do is wait until the oxygen ran out. So much for that idea. Keep
thinking, I tell myself. The main bilge pump_if it's out of order, we
still have compressed air. But after that futile blowing we tried
earlier, is there enough left? Who really knows whether the compressed
air tanks have remained airtight? Without bilge pumps _and_ compressed
air we've had it. That much is clear: We have to be able to run pumps
_and_ blow. Reduce our weight _and_ create buoyancy. And what happens if
the buoyancy cells can no longer hold the compressed air at all--if it
immediately rushes out through a leak or a loose connection the moment we
begin to blow? What if it just bubbles up to the surface without
providing any lift at all?
There's an infernal stench. No mistaking it--battery gas--so the
battery cells must have gone. Battery cells are fragile. The explosion
and then the impact as we hit bottom . . . Our very ability to move
depends on our batteries. If the batteries are gone . . .
"Move it!" This from the Chief. "Faster, faster!" from the bosun.
And constant whispered reports, mostly from the stern. I hear them, but
can no longer take anything in.
Men come through the control room swaying grotesquely as they try
to keep their balance. I press myself against the periscope housing,
tormented by the feeling of being superfluous. In the way.
The Second Watch Officer, quite close to me, is also pushed to one
side. The seamen have nothing more to do. Normally there is plenty of
work for the sailors on a ship that has gone aground. But we are a
_sunken_ ship. No work for sailors on sunken ships.
The gasping somewhere close to me is coming from the controlroom
mate. Tin-ear Willie. Deaf ears, perhaps they'd even be a blessing. See
nothing, hear nothing, smell nothing; sink into the floor--but they're
iron floor plates, not much good for sinking into. We have fuel oil to
burn: granted. But who the hell knows whether we'll ever need it again.
No use pretending: we're trapped. No creeping away this time, no evasive
tactics. We might as well be nailed down. Our tube is holding, granted
again, but they've turned it into a éoffin. Without buoyancy we can lie
here till Judgment Day. The resurrection of the body . . . from nine
hundred feet. Wonderboys of the German Navy!
Against the dim light at the hydroplane post I can see that the
Commander's shoulders are sagging slightly. Apparently compelled to
imitate him, I let myself go loose. I can feel the relief all the way
down my back. The rhomboideus--that was what just uncramped itself. The
great shoulder muscle, once learned, never forgotten. Anatomy classes in
Dresden. The silly snipping away at corpses. Gas victims were good: they
lasted better than people who had died of natural causes. The hall full
of skeletons, all arranged like antique sculpture. A collection of
ludicrous figures of bone: the Discus Thrower, the Votary, the Thorn
Puller.
"Funny," I hear the Commander whisper in the direction of the
manometer. He turns toward me and goes on: "He came at me like this,
turned aside, sideslipped a little. All as clear as daylight!"
I can't see his hand motions; he confuses me completely. For him,
this airplane is the only thing that seems to exist. "Perhaps there were
two bombs--I couldn't make out exactly!"
The air hangs in smoky blue layers. Hard to breathe. Smell of gas.
Two men in the Officers' Mess are taking off the cover of battery one. In
the emergency light through the hatch I can see that one of them is
holding a strip of blue litmus paper in his left hand and inserting a
measuring stick with his right; he lifts the stick and wets the litmus
paper. I stare at the two as if they are altar boys performing at High
Mass.
Breathless orders from the Chief. "Get limewash in there right now.
Then find out how many cells have run dry!"
So the bilge water in the battery compartment contains acid. A lot
of battery cells must have cracked and run out, and the sulphuric acid
has combined with sea water to form chlorine gas. That's what's stinking
so hideously.
The Old Man bid too high, now he's being called. What can he do
about it? That crazy crowd in Kernével, the gentlemen of the Staff, are
the ones we can thank for this. We'll be on their conscience.
A voice in my head starts to jeer: "Conscience! Some conscience! In
Kernével we're nothing but a number. Cross it out and that's it. The
shipyard builds a new boat. Plenty of crews ready in the personnel
reserve."
I see the Chief through the haze. His shirt is soaked and open to
the navel, his hair hangs in a tangle over his face. There's a diagonal
scratch across his left cheek.
The Second Engineer comes from astern. I gather from his whispering
that the water is still slowly gaining in the motor-room bilge. Then the
news is reduced to fragments. "Diesel room making water . . . a lot . . .
flooding valve for torpedo cell one under tube five has burst . . . coldwater pipes . . . motor bearings . . . crack in the air-cooler pipe . .
He has to stop to catch his breath.
Boots scuffle over the floor plates.
Instantly the Old Man orders silence. Right, dammit--the little
ship is still circling around up there.
Some of the breaches seem to be a complete mystery. The Second
Engineer can't make out where the water is seeping in. It's rising in the
control-room bilge too: The dull gurgling is clearly audible.
"What about the oil?" the Old Man asks. "Which fuel tank was hit?"
The Chief disappears aft. After a couple of minutes he returns to
report. "At first there was a jet of oil out of the exhaust duct-- but it
turned to water."
"Strange," says the Old Man.
This is obviously against the rules. The exhaust duct, I learn,
lies close to the diesels. If the tank there had been cracked, the jet of
water should have shot out of the exhaust duct under much greater
pressure than it actually did. The Commander and the Chief wrack their
brains. The tank was still half full--so how could there be such a weak
jet? Along with the ordinary fuel tanks, two of our buoyancy tanks were
refilled with additional supplies pumped in from the _Weser_.
"Strange," the Chief echoes. "First oil, then water."
"Where does the connection from this fuel tank pass through the
pressure hull to the outboard flange? And where are the plugs for the
exhaust and intake?" Apparently there is still a chance that only the
exhaust duct has been hit and that the tank itself has not been cracked.
The two of them can only guess, since the ducts lie so deeply
hidden that no one can get at them.
The Chief disappears hastily toward the stern again.
I try to form a picture of the various tanks. In the saddle tanks,
oil is floating on water, and the pressure is equalized. No empty spaces.
So these tanks are less vulnerable than the fuel tanks. Very likely one
of the outer tanks is cracked. But the measurements should show how much
oil we have lost. The only question is whether the Chief knows exactly
how much oil there should be in the tanks. In any case, the oil gauge is
not that accurate. And the calculation of oil used per hour of running
time is just as bad. Only the regular measurements give exact amounts.
But when were all the tanks last measured?
The control-room mate arrives, soaked through, to report that a
valve in a pipe was broken. He has repaired the damage. So that was the
reason for all the water in the control-room bilge.
All at once I'm aware that the propeller noise has vanished. A
trick? Perhaps they've stopped their engine? Do we dare breathe easy, or
is the damned scow trying something new?
"Everything's busted!" I hear someone murmur. It must be Dorian. I
strain to hear. Still no propeller.
"Now they've done their duty and retired," mutters the Old Man.
"But he can't have seen us; it's impossible."
The lap-of-honor boys have lost their audience: no more noise, the
Old Man's stopped thinking about them. It's the airplane he's obsessed
with . . . "He _couldn't_. Absolutely out of the question--in that 
darkness . . . and those clouds. He was there much too suddenly. Flew
straight at us." Then something like ". . . no radio--bad business.
Damned important." I know what he means. Others must be told about the
new device the British have. For some time there's been a rumor that the
Tommies have a new electronic direction finder that's small enough to fit
into a cockpit. We're proof positive that the rumor is true. If they can
spot us from their airplanes, if we're no longer safe even at night, then
it's "Lash the helm and start praying."
The Old Man wants to warn the other U-boats, but we're not exactly
in a position to send out news bulletins.
In the control room there's such confusion now that I prefer to
move into the Officers' Mess. But there's no room here either. Everything
is covered with plans and blueprints and sketches. I become aware of the
terrifying double meaning of the German word for "sketch": a break. A
break in the pressure hull, a break in the ribs.
The ribs simply _cannot_ have withstood that hideous impact. Nor
the explosions before it. The steel skin may be somewhat elastic, but the
ribs are in the form of rings and have no "give."
The Chief lays out an electrical diagram. He hastily draws lines
with the broken stump of a pencil, murmuring constantly to himself, then
with trembling hands he unbends a paper clip and uses that instead. He
takes the wire to scratch a sketch in the linoleum of the table, which
seems to imply that damage to our furniture-- which is usually treated
with such care--no longer matters at all.
The First Watch Officer sits beside him polishing his binoculars.
Completely crazy. For the moment, seamanship is absurd--but he doesn't
seem to have grasped this fact. Madness, as though clear vision was what
mattered down here! His face, usually so smooth, has two deep folds
running from his nostrils to the corners of his mouth. His long upper lip
looks as if it's in parentheses. Blond stubble on his chin. This is no
longer our dapper First Watch Officer.
A buzzing around the light. The fly! She too has survived. She'll
probably outlive us all.
How late is it anyway? I discover that my watch is gone. A bad
sign! I manage to get a look at the Chief's. A few minutes past midnight.
The Commander appears and directs a questioning glance at the
Chief. "Can't be done with available materials," is what I make of the
Chief's murmured reply.
Out of _what_, then? Are we supposed to order up some shipyard
workers? Summon the specialists who built the boat?
All the floor plates have been taken up immediately in front of our
table and in the gangway. Two men are working below in battery one.
Lengths of cable and tools are being handed down to them from the control
room.
"Fucking shit!" I hear a voice say from below. "Goddam filth!"
Suddenly Pilgrim appears in the opening. His eyes are streaming.
Coughing heavily, he reports in the direction of the control room, since
he can't see the Chief sitting in the Officers' Mess. "Total of twentyfour battery cells run out!"
Twenty-four out of how many? Will twenty-four cripple us, or is
that tolerable? The Chief straightens up and orders Pilgrim and his
helper to put on rescue gear. Two brown pouches are fetched from the
control room. I hand them down.
While the two are still busy with the rescue gear, the Chief
himself works his way down through the hole in front of our table. After
a few minutes he twists himself out again, coughing, hastily fetches a
plan of the batteries out of the locker, spreads it over the other plans,
and studies it intently. He crosses out the individual battery cells--all
twenty-four of them.
"The bridging bars won't be enough in any case." He doesn't even
raise his face from the diagram. This means that the smashed cells can
simply be taken out and thrown overboard. The Chief wants to bridge them
and see whether the few cells remaining intact will function.
Finding the shortest way to connect the undamaged cells appears to
be extremely complicated. The Chief begins to sweat; he draws a line,
crosses it out again. Every few seconds he snuffles.
The Gigolo comes through the wardroom, balancing a big pail of
white limewash that slops back and forth. This is to neutralize the
sulphuric acid that has run out of the batteries, thereby preventing the
formation of chlorine gas. I hear the Gigolo open the door of the can. In
there is the drain for the washing faucet that will take the limewash
into the battery bilge.
"Move it, men. _Move!_" yells the Chief. Then he gets up
hesitantly. With the diagram still in his hand, he bends over the manhole
to battery one and gives hushed directions to the man below, Pilgrim. I
can't hear Pilgrim's reply. The Chief might as well be talking into a
void. A weird muffled coughing and groaning comes out of the pit.
The Commander loudly orders white bread and butter. I must be
having a stroke: white bread and butter? Now? He's certainly not hungry.
He must be trying to indicate that everything's really all right, that
the Commander has an appetite. And that whoever has an appetite can't be
in serious trouble.
The steward actually arrives with acrobatic contortions, carrying a
huge slice of white bread and a knife. Where can he have found the bread
in all that confusion?
"Have half?" the Commander asks me.
"No thanks!"
He produces something like a grin, then leans back and gives a
demonstration of how to chew. His lower jaw moves back and forth like
that of a ruminating cow.
Two men manage to get over the opening in the floor by swinging
hand-over-hand along a pipe, and see him eating. Which means the news
will spread through the boat--exactly as he intended.
Little Zörner pushes himself up from below and pulls off his nose
clip. Sweat is dripping from his bare torso. He sees the Old Man and his
mouth falls open with astonishment.
The Old Man pushes bread and knife aside: end of act.
The Chief's exasperated voice comes up from below. "Goddammit!
What's the matter _now?_ Zörner, why's the light gone?"
"Shit," says someone.
Apparently they're short-handed below. I catch sight of a lamp in a
corner of the mess, reach for it, test it. It works. With my arms braced
behind me and the lamp pushed into the waist of my trousers I let myself
down. The Chief is complaining again. "What the hell's the matter? Are we
getting some light or aren't we?"
And now I appear as the Light of the World--like the Lord God with
his halo. The Chief receives me silently. As if getting ready to repair 
the undersides of a car, I stretch myself out, half on my side, on the
flat traveling platform that runs on rails under the floor. A tidy little
place down here! I hope the Chief isn't kidding himself: If the motor
dies on us, what we're doing here is futile. Even I understand that much,
Funny that he doesn't say a word. I see his right leg beside me, lying
there like a corpse's. Good thing I can hear his gasping breath. Now he's
telling me how to hold the lamp, and I see his oil-covered fingers in the
beam of light, curling, fanning out, reaching and coming together.
Silently I beseech him to keep going. Don't fumble around so
nervously. Work cleanly, don't rush it. Everything depends on this.
Suddenly I see us from the outside, a picture seen a thousand
times, handsome heroes smeared with oil and filth, posing stretched out;
movie-star miners with distorted faces and thick beads of sweat on our
foreheads.
Now my free hand is needed too. Pull this tight. All right, I've
got it. Slowly now, so the wrench won't slip off. Shit, it did. Try
again.
If only we could move! It's a mine gallery, except that instead of
boring a passage, we work with wrenches, pliers, and bridging bars. The
air is hardly bearable now. Pray god the Chief doesn't break down! He has
a wrench in his mouth like an Indian stalking someone with a knife. He
crawls forward a good ten feet. I follow him, scraping both my shins in
the process.
I didn't have the faintest notion that the battery under the floor
plates we walked on every day was so big. I'd always pictured a "battery"
as being something much smaller. This is a gigantic enlargement of the
automobile variety, but how much of it is usable? If there are more holes
than knitting in a sock then it just isn't a sock any more and goes into
the ragbag. What we have here is junk already--they've turned the whole
boat into junk, the bastards.
Air! For god's sake, just send down some air! The steel clamps
around my chest are squeezing me to death.
A face appears from above. I have a sudden impulse to seize hold of
it. I can't make out whose it is, because it's turned a hundred eighty
degrees: It's hard to recognize someone who's standing on his head.
The Chief gives me a sign. We have to get out of here. Helping
hands are extended. I'm breathing in sharp, jerky gasps.
"Nice fuck-up, eh?" someone asks. I only dimly hear the voice. I
can't even say "Yes!" No breath. My lungs heave. Fortunately there's a
little space for me among all the diagrams on the Chief's sofa. I hear
someone say it's two o'clock. Only two?
The Chief reports to the Old Man that we need wire. The bridging
bars turned out to be insufficient even for this one half battery.
All at once it feels as though our real problem isn't getting to
the surface, but hunting up wire: Wire is the Chief's solution to all our
problems. Even the Second Watch Officer gets involved in the search.
Lovely, gleaming torpedoes in the tubes, in the bow compartment,
and in the upper-deck compartment: twenty thousand marks apiece--but a
bit of old wire? All we need is five marks' worth of the stuff. We're up
to here in shells--but wire . . . It makes you laugh! We have plenty of
ammunition for the damn fool cannon-- both high explosive and incendiary!
But the cannon's lying even deeper than we are, marking the spot where
we'd be right now if the Old Man hadn't made his dash south. Ten high
explosive shells for thirty feet of wire--it'd be a bargain!
The bosun has disappeared into the bow compartment. Lord knows
where he expects to find wire there. And if the bosun doesn't find it in
all his scrambling about, and if the Second Watch Officer doesn't, and
the navigator doesn't and the control-room mate doesn't--what then?
I hear, "Tear out the electric wiring," and, "Twist them together."
That probably won't amount to anything very much. The wire has to be of a
certain diameter. So we braid a number of strands together? The only
question is how long such a time-consuming repair will take.
We're growing perceptibly more stern heavy. The stern torpedo tube
breach is reported to be two-thirds underwater. If the motor is swamped,
then this whole business about the wire is meaningless.
What day of the month is it? The calendar has vanished from the
wall. Gone, like my wristwatch. "A brief span of life was appointed us .
. ."
A few minutes, and the Officers' Mess becomes unendurable. I
maneuver my way back over the open floor plates into the control room. My
whole body aches from my contortions. There's a stabbing sensation
between my shoulder blades and a rending pain all the way down my back.
Even my ass hurts.
On the floor plates, close to the periscope housing, lies the
barograph, knocked out of the rim of the gimbals on which it rested. Two
of its glass plates are smashed. The recording hand has been bent over
like a hairpin. The rising and falling curve on the paper drum has ended
in a downward plunge and a thick ink blot. I'm tempted to tear the paper
off the drum and keep it. If we ever get out of this, I'll frame the
thing and hang it on my wall. A genuine, documentary piece of graphic
art!
The Chief has developed a system of priorities in his fight against
our disasters. First things first. Contain the fastest spreading damage.
Stamp out the growing fire before the wind catches it. Here on board,
every system is of vital importance--there are no superfluous
installations--but our crisis has defined the difference between the
vital and the merely essential.
The Commander and the Chief are whispering together. The chief
mechanic Johann appears from astern; the control-room mate joins in; even
the chief mechanic Franz is allowed to participate. The boat's technical
braintrust is holding a meeting in the control room--the only man missing
is the Second Engineer, who's in the motor room. As far as I can tell,
work in the stern is going ahead steadily and methodically. The Chief has
turned over the trouble with the battery to the two E-mates. Will they be
able to cope?
The group disperses; only the Commander and Isenberg, the controlroom mate, remaining. For the benefit of the men inching their way past,
the Commander makes a show of settling himself firmly on the chart chest,
wrapped in his leather jacket, both arms pushed deep into the pockets,
obviously at ease: the picture of a man who knows he can rely on his
experts.
Pilgrim comes through and requests permission to go forward in
search of wire.
"Go ahead!" says the Old Man. We need wire? Then wire will be
provided, even if we have to reel it out of our own backsides.
The bosun pops up in the forward hatch, as ecstatic as a child
under a Christmas tree, a few yards of old thick wire in his oilsmeared
hands.
"Well, what do you know?" says the Old Man. "That's something,
anyway!"
Number One goes splashing through the water that has now risen
above the floor plates in the after half of the control room and climbs
through the hatch into the petty officers' compartment, to where battery
number two is situated under the floor plates.
"Great!" I hear the voice of the Chief from astern.
The bosun comes back, acting as if he'd discovered America all by
himself. A simple soul. Doesn't seem to realize that a few feet of wire
won't solve our problems.
"Go on looking!" the Old Man orders Number One. Then there's
silence for a good ten minutes: no audience for him to play to.
"Let's hope they don't come back with sweepwires!" I hear him say
finally.
Sweepwires? I think of the Breton mussel fishermen dragging their
trawls over the sandy bottom to pull out the half-buried shells. But
we're definitely not lying on a sandy bottom. We're between rocks. Which
means that sweepwires would be no way to catch our boat--if they're what
I think they are.
The Chief reappears. "How's it going?" the Commander asks.
"Fine. Almost done. Another three cells, Herr Kaleun."
"And astern?"
"So-so!" So-so. That means we're in pretty bad shape.
I collapse onto the leather sofa in the Officers' Mess and try to
visualize our situation: While we were plummeting down, the Old Man
ordered us to blow with everything we had. But it didn't do any good:
We'd already shipped so much water that it couldn't be compensated for by
forcing the water out Of the buoyancy tanks. With all tanks blown, the
boat still sank. It follows that we may be lying on the bottom, but
there's still air in our buoyancy tanks-- the same air we blew in. And
this air could lift us statically--but only if we succeeded in reducing
the weight of the boat. It's a bit like sitting in the gondola of a fully
inflated balloon, kept anchored to the ground by excess ballast. Ballast
has to be thrown out of the gondola so that the balloon can rise. Fair
enough. But it only holds good for us on the assumption that the air
vents in our buoyancy tanks are still watertight. If the valves have
suffered too--that is, if they won't close--then presumably there's no
air in the tanks and we can blow in as much more as we like--the entire
contents of the compressed air cylinders--without the slightest effect.
Of course there's also the dynamic method of shifting the boat.
With the engine going and both hydroplanes up, the boat can be raised
diagonally like an airplane on takeoff. But this method is only possible
with _slight_ excess weight. It certainly won't work in our case: The
boat's too heavy for that. And whether the juice we have left in the
batteries is enough to turn our screws for even a few minutes is a big
question. Does the Chief have any idea how much power the few undamaged
cells can still supply?
We're probably stuck with the balloon method. So the water that has
forced its way into the boat must be got rid of. Expelled. At all costs.
And then up! Up and overboard, and swim for it.
I can hang my films around my neck. I've made a watertight bundle.
The ones of the storm have to go in. They at least must be saved.
There've never been photographs like them.
The damned current in the Strait--if it weren't for that .
A shovelful of sand under our keel at the very last moment. A
miracle.
The Old Man is chewing his lower lip. It's the Chief who's doing
the thinking and directing. Everything depends on his decisions. How can
he stand it? He hasn't been able to let up for a moment.
All breaches seem to have been stopped except for the odd trickle
here and there, a few oozing wounds in our steel skin. But the water
that's already in the boat? I have no idea how much of it there is. Two
pints of water equals two pounds weight--weight I feel in every nerve of
my body. We're heavy, heavy--monstrously heavy. We lie here on the bottom
as if we've taken root.
"Stinks of shit in here!" That's Tin-ear Willie.
"So open the windows!" jeers Frenssen.
From the stern there's an explosive hiss like escaping steam. It
goes right through me. For chrissake, what's happened now? The noise
changes to that of an acetylene torch cutting steel. Impossible to get
back there and see what it really is.
What does the Old Man have in mind? What's he thinking about as he
sits there staring into thin air? Will he attempt to surface, run for the
African coast, and beach the boat? That would seem the most likely,
because he wants to surface before it's light. If all he had in mind was
to surface and have us go overboard, he wouldn't care whether the men aft
got their place clear before dawn or not. But that is exactly what he
keeps asking about.
Swimming in the dark would be much too risky. The current would
split us up in no seconds flat. Would the Tommies even notice us at all?
We have no emergency blinkers on our life preservers. Not even red
flares. Totally unequipped for special emergencies.
Not a sound from the Old Man. I can hardly question him. The first
thing is obviously to try to free the boat from the bottom, get rid of
ballast. But then, if that works, what do we do next?
At this moment he appears in the Officers' Mess. "He's bound to get
a medal for this," I hear him say. "One of those nice jingling ones, the
Victoria Cross or something."
I stare at him, moonstruck.
"He's certainly earned it. Perfect piece of work. No fault of his
we're still lying around here instead of being blown to bits!"
I can see it now. A low barracks on Gibraltar. A crowd of pilots in
their overalls, champagne glasses in hand, gathered to celebrate the
sinking of a U-boat--a definite kill, confirmed by aerial reconnaissance,
and with additional corroboration by the Navy.
"Naked fear," whispers the Commander, pointing at the back of the
new control-room assistant. His sarcasm is like a laying-on-of-hands:
_Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give
you rest_.
The navigator is standing in the gangway and reports, "Periscope
top's cracked." It sounds as if he'd discovered a hole in his shoe. "Sky
periscope's gone too!"
"So," is all the Old Man says. He sounds tired and resigned, as if
a little destruction more or less no longer mattered.
Things must look worst aft. I wonder how the bomb could have worked
so much havoc in the stern. The damage in the control room and in battery
one is understandable, but that so much should have been broken aft is a 
mystery. Perhaps there were two bombs? Didn't it sound like a double
explosion? I can't ask the Old Man.
The Chief comes through the aftership to report to the Old Man.
From his outpourings I discover that almost all the outboard plugs have
leaked. The whole electrical system has failed. As a result, the gunnery
control is also out of commission. The bearings may also have been
somewhat damaged. However, all that means is that they'd run hot if the
driving shafts could turn.
What he's providing is a complete inventory of the damages. Not
only the main bilge pump but all other bilge pumps have failed. The coldwater pump ditto. The forward trim cell is no longer watertight. The
foundation bolts of the port diesel--miraculously--have held. But those
of the starboard diesel are sheared off. The compressors have been torn
from their bases. The forward hydroplane can hardly be moved--probably
wrecked when the boat slammed into the rocks on the bottom. The compass
system is ruined-- magnetic, gyro, secondary--everything. The automatic
log and the sounder system have been torn from their supports and are
probably out of action. The radio has been badly hit. Even the engine
room telegraph is out of order.
"Babel is not yet lost," mutters the Old Man. The Chief blinks and
seems to have trouble recognizing him. What's the exact quotation? I rack
my brains. Babel lost? That's not it.
Suddenly I hear a new sound. No question, it's coming from outside:
a high, rhythmic singsong with a duller beat in it. There they are again!
The Old Man heard it at the same instant I did. He listens with his mouth
open and a scowl on his face. The vibration and whining increase.
Turbines! The Asdic is sure to be next. Everyone freezes--sitting,
standing, kneeling. I have trouble identifying the dark masses around me.
To the left beside the periscope--that must be the navigator.
Recognizable as usual, because his left shoulder is higher than his
right. The hunched figure in front of the hydroplane table is the Chief.
The man to his left must be the Second Watch Officer. Directly under the
overhead hatch is the control-room mate.
Again the clamps around my chest, the choking in my throat.
My pulse is hammering. Everyone in the room must be able to hear
it.
My ears pick up a whole range of tiny sounds, including all the
ones they missed earlier: the squeaking of leather jackets, for example,
and the tiny mouselike peeping of the soles of boots on iron floor
plates.
Sweepwires? Asdic? Maybe the ship that was so fond of making the
lap of honor had no depth charges on board, and this is its replacement.
I tense every muscle, go totally rigid. Mustn't let anything show.
What's happening? Is the whining of the screws letting up a bit--
or am I just fooling myself?
Pain in my lungs. Cautiously, gently, I let my chest expand.
Breathe in unsteadily, then gasp for the next lungful. No doubt about it,
the noises are getting weaker.
"Going away," mutters the Old Man. And immediately I go limp.
"Destroyer," he says expressionlessly. "It's teeming with ships
around here. They've called up everything that can float!"
By which he means it was pure accident that a ship passed over us.
A stone is lifted from my heart.
New sounds to jangle my nerves--this time the ringing and pounding
of tools makes me jump. They're apparently hard at work again in the
aftership. Only now does it dawn on me that once again there are more men
in the control room than belong here. This attempt to get a place under
the tower when the enemy is around is pure atavism. As if the "lords"
didn't already know how deep we are. Down here the seamen have no
advantage over the engine-room personnel. The rescue gear isn't worth a
damn. Except, that is, for the oxygen cartridges, which contain half an
hour of life if our oxygen cylinders give out.
The thought that the Tommies have long since written us off and
that our presumed sinking has been reported hours ago to the British
Admiralty fills me with something between contempt and horror. _Not yet_,
you fuckers.
As long as _I_ am aboard, this boat cannot perish. The lines of my
hand say that I will have a long life. So we're _bound_ to get through.
Only, no one must find out that I'm immune, or I'd be a jinx. They
haven't got us, not by a long shot! We're still breathing--under pressure
and gasping, admittedly, but we're still alive.
If only we could send out a bulletin! But even if our radio hadn't
gone to hell, we couldn't transmit from this depth. So no one at home
will know how we met our end. "Died nobly in his country's service," the
usual letter from the Commander in Chief to the next of kin. Our disaster
will remain a mystery. That is, unless the British Admiralty relays over
the Calais radio how they caught us.
They've developed death reports into a fine art: precise details,
so that the people at home will believe them; name, birthdate, size of
the Commander's cap. And what about H.Q.? They'll take their time before
sending out the three-star report, as they usually do with the Dönitz
Volunteer Corps. Besides, we might have valid reasons for not sending
signals. We're sure to be ordered to report in the near future. Once,
twice--the same old story.
But the way things stand, the gentlemen of the Staff will soon
conclude--correctly--that we haven't achieved the requisite breakthrough.
There was, after all, very little chance we would, as Kernével was well
aware. Their mad slavedriver can gently break the news to himself that
he's short one more boat, sunk off Gibraltar--British war port--a rock
inhabited by apes--Mediterranean location--the "enchanted meeting place
of two seductive climates"-- that's what it said, after all! Christ!
Don't go to pieces! I stare at the bananas hanging from the ceiling over
the sound room, quietly ripening away. Two, three splendid specimens of
pineapple among them. But this oniy makes me feel worse: below, the
smashed-up batteries; up there, a Spanish garden!
The Chief appears again, opens the locker containing the rolledup
diagrams, riffles through, pulls one out, and spreads it on the table. I
come to his assistance by weighting down the corners of the diagram with
books. It's a longitudinal section of the boat, with the pipelines drawn
in as black veins or red arteries.
The Second Engineer bobs up, tangled mop of hair, out of breath. He
bends over the plan beside the Chief. Not a word out of him either.
Silent movie stuff.
Everything hangs on their deliberations. They're sitting in
judgment on our fate. I keep quiet. Don't disturb them. The Chief's
pencil points at a place on the diagram and he nods at his colleague, who
nods back--"understood." Both straighten up simultaneously. It looks as 
though the Chief now knows how to go about getting the water out of the
boat. But how will he manage to make any headway against the external
pressure?
I catch sight of a piece of bread with a bite out of it on the
table in the Officers' Mess--fresh white bread from the Weser. Thickly
buttered, with a chunk of sausage on it. Repulsive! My stomach turns.
Someone must have been eating just when the explosion came. Amazing it
didn't slide off the table when the boat stood on its head.
Breathing is getting harder by the minute. Why doesn't the Chief
release more oxygen? Pathetic that we're so dependent on air. I need only
hold my breath for a short time and the seconds begin ticking in my ear,
and then I get a choking sensation in my throat. We have fresh bread,
we're fully stocked with food--but what we really need is air. It's being
powerfully brought home to us that man can't exist without it. When else
have I ever dwelled on the fact that I can't live without oxygen, that
behind my ribs two flabby lobes are unceasingly expanding and
contracting. Lungs--I've only seen them cooked. Boiled lungs--a favorite
dog food! Lungs with dumplings, an entrée for sixty _pfennigs_ in the
main depot, where they kept the liver-dumpling soup warm in marmalade
jars, inside sauerkraut kettles along with all the sawdust from the
floor-or did, until the health squad shut the place down.
Nine hundred feet. What's the weight of the column of water that's
resting on the boat? I used to know: I had the figures im printed on my
mind. But now they've faded. My brain is hardly functioning at all. I
can't think with all this dull pressure inside my skull.
In my left-hand trouser pocket I feel my talisman--an oval piece of
turquoise. I open my left fist and run my fingers lightly over the stone:
like smooth, slightly rounded skin. Simone's belly! Immediately I hear
her babbling in my ear, "That is my little _nombril_-- what do you call
it? Button in the belly? Belly button. Funny-- _pour moi c'est ma boite a
ordure--regarde----regarde!_" She fingers some fluff out of the depths of
her navel and holds it up with a giggle. If she could see me now, nine
hundred feet down. Not just anywhere, somewhere out there in the
Atlantic, but with a permanent address: Strait of Gibraltar, African Side
Of. Here we are in our little tube with its cargo of fifty-one bodies:
flesh, bone, blood, spinal jelly, pumping lungs and racing pulses,
twitching eyelids--fifty-one minds, each with its own world of memories.
I try to picture her hair. How did she wear it toward the end? I
rack my brains but can't remember. I try to bring her image closer, see
her hair, but it remains indistinct. Doesn't matter. It'll come back
suddenly. Mustn't try so hard. Memories return of their own accord.
I can see her violet sweater. And the yellow bandana and the mauvecolored blouse with the tiny pattern that, if you looked at it closely,
read "_Vive la France_" a thousand times over. The orangegold tone of her
skin. And now I have her mad hairdo as well. The strands that always fell
across her forehead were what excited me. It was important to Simone to
look deliberately disheveled in an artistic way.
It wasn't right of her to swipe my new binoculars for her Herr
Papa. He must have wanted to test them out to see whether the new design
really is so much better than the old, must have been intrigued by the
new blue tint that makes our glasses so much better for night work. And
Simone? Did she simply want to show off? Monique got a toy coffin,
Genevieve got one, Germaine too--but not Sim one.
The Old Man turns up with the Chief. They bend over a diagram. I
catch the words "by hand into the regulator tank." Aha, that must be
about the water that has got in! By hand? Will that work? Anyway, both of
them nod.
"Then outboard from the regulator tank by means of auxiliary pumps
and compressed air . . ."
The Chief's voice has a distinct vibrato. A miracle that he's still
on his feet--he was already wiped out before this mess began. Anyone with
a couple of dozen depth pursuits behind him is inevitably used up. Which
was why he was due to be relieved. Just one more patrol!
And now this! He has big drops of sweat on his forehead, but his
brow is so furrowed and wrinkled that they can't run off. When he turns
his head, you can see his whole face shining with sweat.
". . . racket. . . can't be avoided. . . can't be done . . .
buoyancy cell three . . ."
What's he saying about buoyancy cell three? It can't have suffered
any damage, it lies inside the pressure hull. What was it they said: The
boat can float on buoyancy cell three alone--but with so much water
aboard, the amount of lift this one cell can give is naturally not
enough_nothing like it. So it comes back to this: The water has to be got
out of the boat as quickly as possible. I haven't the faintest idea how
he intends to pump the water from the control room into the regulator
cells and then from the regulator cells overboard. But he's no fool. He
never proposes anything if he's not sure of his facts.
I gather that he's unwilling to try to free the boat from the
bottom until all necessary repairs have been made. Apparently one attempt
is all we've got.
"Boat . . . first get her ... even keel!" The Old Man. Of course
the damned stern heaviness! But there's no question of pumping the water
forward now. So?
". . . water by hand from aft into the control room." "By hand."
For chrissake--by hand? In pans? Hand to hand? I stare at the Old Man and
wait for him to make his meaning clear, then I catch the words, "bucket
brigade." He really means it.
A fire brigade forms up through the petty officers' quarters and
the galley, and I join it. My place is beside the hatch. Hoarsely
whispered directions and curses. A bucket comes toward me--the kind the
steward uses to wash dishes. It's half full. I reach for it and let it
swing like a U-shaped dumbbell through the hatch; the control-room mate
has the job of taking it from me. I can hear him empty it out into the
control-room bilge level with the periscope. The sharp gush and splash
are suggestive, disgusting.
More and more pails and buckets are also being handed back in the
opposite direction to be passed through toward the stern. Instant chaos.
Hissing orders, the Chief straightens out the confusion of empty and
full.
The man who hands the pails to me is Zeitler, wearing a filthy,
torn shirt. With each bucket he shows me a grimly determined face. From
behind him come croaks and whispers of "Look out!": a particularly heavy
bucket appears. I have to seize the handle with both hands. It still
slops over. The swill soaks my trousers and shoes. My back is already
wet--but that's sweat. Twice as I pass a bucket I get an encouraging grin
from the Old Man. That at least is something.
Sometimes the procession stops because there's been a foul-up
somewhere astern. A few half-suppressed curses and then the chain begins
again.
The control-room mate doesn't have to be careful. He's the last in
line and can let the water spill over onto the floor plates. I can see
that the floor in the petty officers' compartment is also wet. But under
the floor plates in that compartment is battery two. Won't it be damaged?
I tell myself that the Chief is around: He'll take care of it.
Another slop--right over my stomach this time. Shit!
A dull bang, curses, the chain stops again; this time a bucket has
apparently hit the hatch rim of the galley.
Am I wrong? Or has the boat already tilted back a couple of degrees
toward the horizontal?
The water in the control room is now ankle deep.
How late is it? Must be at least four am. Too bad about my
wristwatch. Of course the leather band was a dead loss--glued together,
not sewn. Modern trash. But the works were good. I had it ten years
without a single repair.
"Look out!" Zeitler snaps. Damn it, I must be careful. I no longer
have to bend my arm. If Zeitler hands me the pail properly, I can save a
lot of strength. He has a worse time of it: He has to heave the pails
through the hatch, and he needs both hands to do it, I only have to use
my right. I no longer even notice the way it reaches out and lets the
pail swing through like a trapeze until it reaches the catcher on the
other side.
"When's first light?" the Old Man asks the navigator. Kriechbaum
thumbs through his tables. "Morning light begins at 07.30." So there's
very little time left!
It may already be later than four o'clock. If we don't make our try
soon, surfacing will be out for a whole day--we'll have to wait till
evening. That means the people up there will have those hours of
beautiful sunlight to play games with us.
"Take a break." The whispers from mouth to mouth. "Break-- break--
break."
If the Old Man is thinking of making a run for the coast-- always
assuming that the attempt to surface is successful--then he needs the
protection of darkness. We hadn't even reached the narrowest spot in the
Strait. The coast is still quite a stretch from here, so the time that
remains to us, if we're to succeed, is even shorter. Will the bit of
juice in the undamaged cells be enough for the motors? And what good is
the whole patchwork on both batteries if the shaft bearings are damaged?
The Chief's misgivings weren't just thin air.
Christ, look at the men! Green faces, yellow faces; green-black
circles around the sockets of red-rimmed eyes. Mouths half open from lack
of air, dark holes.
The Chief reappears to report that the motors are out of danger.
However, he wants more water out of the main motor room.
"All right," says the Commander in his normal voice. "Carry on!"
The first time I reach for a pail again I realize how sore my
muscles are. I can hardly manage to get back into the proper swing.
Choking, heaving lungs. No more air in the boat. But one thing is
certain: We are definitely getting back onto an even keel.
The Commander sloshes over to the hatch. "Going okay?" he calls
aft.
"_Jawohl_, Herr Kaleun!"
I could drop right here, in the muck all over the floor plates--I
wouldn't give a damn. I count the pails. Just as I'm saying "fifty" to
myself, the order comes from astern. "Belay the bailing!"
Thank god! I still have to take four or five buckets from Zeitler,
but the empty pails no longer come back from the control-room mate:
They're passed on farther forward.
Now to get my wet gear off. Chaos in the petty officers'
compartment because everyone wants dry clothes. I get hold of my sweater,
even manage to find my leather trousers on my bunk. Fantastic! Dry
things! And now into my seaboots. Frenssen's elbow lands in my ribs, and
Pilgrim tramples on my right foot, but finally I manage it. I splash
through the control room, bouncing like a street urchin. In the Officers'
Mess I can finally put my feet up.
Then I hear "oxygen." From mouth to mouth the order goes through
the boat, "Adjust potash cartridges. All men off duty rest on their
bunks!"
The Second Watch Officer stares at me in consternation.
Another message is passed from mouth to mouth. "Watch one another.
Be sure no one's snorkel siips out of his mouth while he's asleep."
"Haven't used one of these for a long time," mutters the bosun next
door.
Potash cartridges. That answers the question--it's going to take a
long time. No rosy glow of dawn for us this time. The Second Watch
Officer says nothing. He doesn't bat an eye, though the orders don't seem
very welcome to him. I see by his watch that it's five o'clock.
I stagger back toward the stern again, splashing through the water
in the control room, aware of the frozen faces of the personnel. Breaking
out the potash cartridges means that there's no possibility of surfacing
during the next few hours. Which also means: wait till dark. A whole day
on the bottom. God Almighty! The engine-room crew will have ample time to
put their shop in order again. No reason to hurry now.
With trembling hands I fish around in a corner at the head of my
bed until I find my potash cartridge, a rectangular metal case twice the
size of a cigar box.
The other inhabitants of the petty officers' compartment are
already at work screwing in the tubes with the mouthpiece and getting the
rubber nozzle--the snorkel--between their teeth. Only Zeitler hasn't got
that far: He's swearing a blue streak. "Goddam shit--I've fucking well
had enough!"
The black tubes are already hanging out of Pilgrim's and
Kleinschmidt's mouths. I put on the nose clip, noticing as I do so how
shaky my hands are. Cautiously I take the first gulp of air through the
cartridge. Never done it before. Nervous about how it'll work. As I
breathe out again, the valve in the mouthpiece rattles: that can't be
right. Was I breathing too hard? Well then, slow down, do it more
quietly. The air from the snout has a foul taste of rubber. Hope it won't
go on like that.
The box is heavy. It hangs in front of my stomach like a street
vendor's tray. Weighs a good two pounds. The contents are supposed to
absorb the carbon dioxide we breathe out, or at least enough of it so
that what we breathe in won't contain more than four per cent. More is
dangerous. We could suffocate in our own exhalation. "When it gets
chemical, it gets psychological," said the Chief. How right he was!
How long will the oxygen really last? The underwater endurance of a
VII-C is supposed to be three days. So there must be enough oxygen in the
tanks for three times twenty-four hours--without forgetting the period of
grace contained in the steel cylinders of the life-saving gear.
If Simone could see me like this, with the snorkel in my mouth and
the potash cartridge on my stomach. .
I stare at Zeitler, taking him as my mirror image: wet matted hair;
drops of sweat thick on his forehead; great, staring, feverish eyes with
violet-black rings underneath; nose clamped shut by the clip. Under it
his dark rubber proboscis protruding from a matted stubble of beard--a
terrifying carnival figure.
Those ghoulish beards! How long have we actually been out? Try
counting: seven, eight weeks? Or is it actually nine or ten?
Simone drifts in again. I see her on a movie screen, smiling,
gesticulating, pushing down her shoulder straps. I blink--and she
disappears.
Just a look around the control room, I say to myself, and clamber
laboriously through the hatch. This damned street vendor's box! Now I see
Simone projected directly onto pipes, shafts, and manometers. I see the
tangle of ducts and hand wheels for shut-off valves, and over them
Simone: breasts, thighs, fluff, her moist, half-open mouth. She rolls
over on her stomach, raising her feet in the air, reaches for her ankles,
and does the "swan." The striped shadows from the venetian blinds glide
back and forth over her body as she rocks. Zebra-swan. I close my eyes.
Then right in front of me a double exposure: a face with a
proboscis growing out of its mouth. I jump: It's the Second Watch
Officer. He's staring at me. He seems to want to communicate. Awkwardly
he pulls the rubber nozzle out of his mouth, dripping saliva. "Refrain
from use of pistols. Danger of explosion!" he says nasally, lifting his
eyebrows. Of course! The gas from the battery.
He sucks in his pacifier again, and winks his left eye before
sitting down on his bunk. I can't even say, "Very funny, you idiot!"
Unsteady as a drunkard, I feel my way along the lockers, touch the
Old Man's curtain, then more paneled walls. No contortions needed to get
into the Officers' Mess. The floor plates have been laid down again. The
battery's probably not a total write-off. In rudimentary form it may
still be usable for a very short distance under power.
There's a light burning. If we left only this one bulb on it would
probably keep burning forever. An electric bulb--forty watts--must use
less current in a whole week than is needed for a single turn of the
propellers. The Eternal Light--nine hundred feet down!
Someone has cleaned up--more or less. The pictures are back on the
wall again, admittedly without glass. Even the books are in the shelf, in
some kind of rough order. The First Watch Officer must be lying in his
bunk. At any rate his curtain is closed. The Second Watch Officer is
sitting in the left corner of the Chief's bunk, eyes tight shut. He'd do
better to lie down properly instead of slumping in a corner like a wet
sack. He's wormed his way in so firmly that he doesn't look as if he ever
intends to move again.
It has never been so peaceful in here before. No traffic, no chang
ing of the watch. Pictures and books. The familiar lamplight, the
handsome veined woodwork, the black leather sofa. No pipes, no white 
ship's paint, not so much as a square inch of damaged hull. A green silk
shade and glass bead fringe on the lamp and it would look just like home.
A bunch of flowers on the table--artificial ones for all I care--and a
fringed tablecloth, and it would be an honestto-god living room. Of
course the leather sofa should have a piece of wood over it with branded
letters or a sampler in cross-stitch with the motto: "A poor thing, but
mine own."
Admittedly, the Second Watch Officer spoils the picture. Or rather
his snorkel does. No fancy-dress party in our living room!
This silence in the boat! It's as if the crew were no longer
aboard, as if we two--the Second Watch Officer and I--were all alone
between these four walls.
The Second Watch Officer has let his head sink down on his chest.
He's succeeded in shutting out the surrounding world. No worries to
trouble the Baby Officer, our Garden Gnome. How on earth has he managed,
now of all times, to go dead to the world? Is he resigned to his fate,
like most of the men? Or is his particular sleeping pill the Old Man's
confidence act? Blind trust in the abilities of the Chief, in the skill
of the repair crew? Or is it simply discipline? Sleep is the order, so
sleep he does?
Now and again he grunts or chokes on his own saliva; he doesn't
wake up but suckles away with smacking noises like a piglet at the tit of
the mother sow.
Ready to drop. Sometimes I drowse for minutes at a time, then force
myself back awake. It must be after six o'clock now. Now the Second Watch
Officer looks like an exhausted fireman.
I ought to try to keep moving. Not just sit around here on my
backside. Better to concentrate on everything that's going on in the boat
right now. Fix the details. Focus on something. But none of that requires
any movement at all. For example, I can fix my eyes on the Second Watch
Officer's glittering rodent teeth. Then his left earlobe: properly
developed, better formed than the First Watch Officer's. I observe the
Second Watch Officer with scientific precision, divide up his head into
separate sections. Make enlargements of his eyelashes, brows, lips.
I try to organize my thoughts. But it's like turning on a defective
motor: It fires a few times and then goes dead.
How many hours have we actually been down here? It must have been
around midnight when we sank, by ship's time in any case. But that
doesn't correspond to our geographical location and is also off an hour;
on board, we're on German Summer Time. Do I subtract or add? I can't
decide. Not even something as simple as that. I'm completely off track.
According to ship's time it must be at least 07.00. In any case we've
lost any chance we had of attempting to surface in the gray of dawn.
We'll have to wait till it's dark again up there.
The British cooks must have been up long ago, serving huge
quantities of fried eggs and bacon, their standard breakfast for the
fleet.
Hunger? For god's sake, don't even think about eating!
The Old Man was only suggesting that we try to surface before dawn
in order to keep us on our feet. Clever of him not to make it definite.
False optimism? Bullshit! It was just to keep the men going.
A whole day down here? Maybe even longer--and this eternal snorkel
in your mouth. God!
In my sleep, I hear the Second Watch Officer clear his throat. I
struggle back to consciousness, surface, and blink hard. Rub my eyes with
the knuckle of my index finger. Heavy head. Lead in my skull. Pains
behind the eyebrows--even worse farther back in my head. The snouted
animal in the other corner is still the Second Watch Officer.
I wish I knew what time it is. Must be midday. My watch was a good
one. Swiss. Seventy-five marks. Already lost it twice, but always found
it again--a miracle each time. Where can it be lying around now?
And still this quiet! No humming of auxiliary machinery. The same
deathly silence. The potash cartridge weighs on my stomach like a
monstrous hot-water bottle.
Now and again a man with oil-smeared hands and arms comes through
the compartment. Still something out of order back there? Hasn't our
position improved at all while I was asleep? Is there new hope? No one to
ask. Secretiveness everywhere.
But how do I know that the compass is functioning again--the whole
system? Did I hear something while I was dozing? The hydroplane is only
partially back in service, and hard to move. But that was already known
before I fell asleep.
How about the water? The Chief had a plan. But does he still
believe in it? Shouldn't have gone to sleep: lost track of everything,
including time.
At some point I heard the Commander say, "We have to surface the
moment it gets dark." But how long is it till then? Outrageous that my
watch has gone.
I start looking for it, and discover that our straw dog has
disappeared. No longer hanging from the ceiling. Nor under the table
either. I let myself slide out of the bunk, crawl through the rubber
boots and cans of food, and fumble about in the dark. Damnation, a
splinter! The Chief's pillow. Then hand towels and leather gloves, but no
dog. However tatty, he's our good-luck charm; he can't just disappear.
I'm about to sit down again when I notice the Second Watch Officer.
He has the dog tucked under his left arm; he's clutching it the way a
child clutches a doll, and he's fast asleep.
Another man comes through, stepping carefully, a heavy tool in his
oil-smeared hands. I'm ashamed to be doing nothing. My only comfort is
the fact that the Second Watch Officer and the entire naval contingent
are also doing nothing. Orders to remain quiet, to sleep. In fact, we
have the harder part: sitting here, lying here, staring straight ahead,
having hallucinations.
This goddam snorkeling. Too much saliva in my mouth. Before, my
gums were as dry as leather, and now this overproduction. Salivary glands
simply aren't designed for this way of life.
Only two boats out of three survive their first patrol. That's the
rule of thumb nowadays: Every third boat is sunk almost at once. Seen in
this light, UA is one of the lucky ones. She has already inflicted all
sorts of damage; she's bled the Tommies white, as they so elegantly put
it. And now the Tommies have turned the tables on us. Another of those
silly metaphors: "turn the tables"--"bleed them white."
Some of the men on the bunks already look as if they'd died in
their sleep: still, peaceful, their nozzles in their mouths. As for the 
ones who are lying on their backs, all you'd have to do is fold their
hands.
I have to keep talking to myself. To everything there is a season--
even this ordeal. I shall put thee through the wringer, saith the Lord,
and I shall rip open thy ass to the topmost vertebra so that howling and
gnashing of teeth shall profit thee nothing.
There it is again: fear that rises from somewhere between my
shoulder blades up into my throat, distends my rib cage, gradually fills
my whole body. Even my cock. Hanged men often have an erection. Or does
that come from something else?
The Commander of the _Bismarck_ still had his Führer in mind when
the time came to die. He even put it in words and had it dispatched as a
radiogram: ". . . to the last shell . . . loyal to the death or some
such elevating text. There was a man after our First Watch Officer's
heart.
We're not very well equipped for this sort of nonsense down here.
We can certainly compose noble texts, but we can't transmit them. The
Führer will have to dispense with the UA's last words. There isn't even
enough air to sing the national anthem.
Good old Marfels, he's had it already. It was a mistake to ship on
the _Bismarck_. Really makes you laugh. Marfels, the badge collector,
still short of a battle medal, so he had to step up and volunteer. Now
his young widow can enjoy the hardware he left behind.
What must it have been like after they got that torpedo in the
rudder mechanism and could only plow around in circles? The salvage ships
_Castor_ and _Pollux_ were ordered out from Brest, but all that was left
of the _Bismarck_ by then had been reduced to scrap metal and mincemeat.
_Dulce et decorum est pro patria_. . . of all the crap!
I seek refuge from my nightmares in Simone. I repeat her name
silently . . . once, twice, again and again. But this time the invocation
fails.
All at once Charlotte appears instead of Simone. Her gourdshaped
tits. The way she could swing them back and forth when she was on her
hands and knees.
Now other pictures force their way upward. Inge in Berlin. The
assistant at Staff Headquarters. The room assigned by the station
commandant. A Berlin room, or rather a hall, really. Don't put on the
light: the blackout curtains are missing. I touch her. Thighs spread, she
lets me fall into her. "For god's sake, don't stop! Go on! Don't stop.
Like that!"
Brigitte, with her taste for turbans. "_J'aime Rambran . . . parce
qu'il a son style!_" It took me a while to realize that she meant
Rembrandt.
And the girl from Magdeburg, with the unwashed neck and freckles on
her nose! The half-filled ashtray with the used condom. The goddam
sluttishness of these schoolgirl whores! Appetite gone. Instant
complaints. "What's wrong _now?_ D'you expect me to wait till hell
freezes over? Loosen up, will you!" And then, "Slow down-- whaddaya
trying to do--bang my fucking head off?"
The carousel keeps spinning, and I see the volunteer with the huge
sagging breasts go sailing by. When asked why she did it free, gratis,
and for nothing, her response was "showing the flag." You could crank her
up, but none of the usual treatment ever got her going. What she wanted 
was gymnastics--brace yourself on hands and toes and give her a lightning
demonstration of sexual push-ups.
I have a clear shot of a pane of frosted glass, the lowest of three
in a white painted door. A phantom face: the exiled husband on all fours,
ostrich-like in the conviction of his own invisibility. "Look at him--
will you look at him! Mr. Peeping Tom himself!"
And now the spinner of fairy tales: knees drawn up, squatting on
top of me chattering away as if she had no idea what was going on
underneath. Didn't want me to move. Just played five years old and told
fairy stories. Where on earth did I find that one?
The two naked whores in the shabby Paris hotel room. I don't want
to look at them. Go away! I try to concentrate on Simone, but I can't
summon her up. Instead I see one of the two whores washing herself
between the legs, sitting on the bidet right under a bare lightbulb.
Slack, pallid skin. The other one's no better. She's kept her stockings
on and her grimy girdle. Gossiping away, she reaches into a battered
shopping bag and pulls out half a pathetically small rabbit that's
already been skinned. Wet newspaper sticks to it in dark-gray patches.
The neck is half severed. There are dark-red trickles of blood around the
ax mark. The whore who's still on the bidet with her face to the wall,
working away with both hands splashing underneath her, keeps screeching
every time she bends her head back toward the bluish white body of the
rabbit, which the other one is holding out to her. She's so excited over
this prize that she starts to sputter with laughter. The one with the
rabbit in her hand has red pubic hair. Sticking next to it on her thigh
there's a piece of the damp newspaper the rabbit had been wrapped in, as
big as your hand. Her belly quivers as she laughs; the slack breasts
wobble in unison.
I feel as nauseated as I did then.
If we don't move as much as a little finger, the consumption of
oxygen must fall to almost zero. Lying stretched out, motionless, not
even blinking our eyelids, we should be able to make our supply hold out
much longer than the averages indicate.
Of course the motion of the lungs in itself uses up oxygen. So--
breathe very shallowly, inhale only as much as the body needs for its
basic functions.
But the oxygen we save here by staying still is being used up by
the men who are exhausting themselves on the damaged engines aft. They're
exploiting our reserves. Sucking the oxygen right out of our mouths.
Now and again a dull clang comes from astern. Each time it makes me
jump: Sounds are magnified five times in water. They're certainly doing
all they can to avoid noise. But how can they work silently with those
heavy tools?
The First Watch Officer comes back from an inspection tour, From
time to time he has to make sure that all the sleepers still have their
snorkels in their mouths. His blond hair, wet with sweat, is stuck to his
forehead.
About all I can see of his face is the cheekbones--his eyes lie in
shadow.
I haven't seen the Chief for a long time. I wouldn't want to be in
his place. It's too much responsibility for one man. Let's hope he's up
to it.
The Old Man appears on silent feet. He's still six feet away from
the table when there's another clang from astern. He grimaces as though
in sudden pain.
He's not wearing a potash cartridge. "Well, how goes it?" he asks,
as though he didn't know that with the nozzle in my mouth I can't reply.
I lift my shoulders slightly by way of an answer, then let them fall. The
Old Man glances quickly into the forward compartment then disappears
again.
I'm ready to drop with exhaustion, but sleep is impossible. Images
float up like entries from a card index. The hairnet lady: hoity-toity
Tante Bella, the Christian Scientist, the healer who'd taken a dip in all
the sacred waters known to man. She did a roaring trade. The hairnets
came in enormous bundles from Hong Kong. By the hundred gross. Tante
Bella had elegant envelopes with transparent windows and uplifting texts
printed on them, and there she sat with three little office drudges, all
of them untangling the hairnets and putting each individual one into its
pale violet-colored envelope--which made the hairnet instantly become
fifty times more expensive than it had been a moment before. Tante Bella
had a good dozen salesmen. Later I learned that she carried on exactly
the same business with contraceptives--but all that happened late at
night. I picture her sitting there in dead earnest, in front of a pile of
pale, rosecolored condoms like a mountain of sheep's intestines, sorting
out the mess with nimble fingers and slipping them into their little
envelopes. Faber was Tante Bella's narne--Bella Faber. Her son, Kurtchen,
looked like a thirty-year-old hamster. He was the head of the sales
force. Hairdressers were his principal clients. Meanwhile, Uncle Erich,
Tante Bella's husband, installed automatic vending machines in the
washrooms of rundown bars. "Three for one reichsmark." Uncle Erich had to
have a drink with every barkeeper on his rounds to refill the machines.
Then back onto his bicycle, one shabby saddlebag for the money and the
other for the contraceptives; dismount, down another shot, out with the
take, in with the condoms, down yet another shot. He couldn't keep it up
for long, good old Uncle Erich with the silver bicycle clips on his
trousers. He never removed them, not even indoors. One day he fell off
his wheels between one vending machine and the next and was done for. The
police carted him off. They must have been flabbergasted at the loads of
coins and condoms they found in his bags.
All at once I notice that the Second Watch Officer's apparatus has
fallen out of his mouth. How long has he been breathing without the
snorkel? Was I dead to the world a while? I shake his shoulder but elicit
no more than a rumble. I have to punch him hard before he gives a start
and stares at me with horror, as though I were some grisly apparition. It
takes a few seconds for him to pull himself together, grope for his
snorkel, and begin to suck on it. Then he's asleep again.
I'll never understand how he manages it. If only he were
pretending--but no, he really is dead to the world again. All that's
lacking is a snore. I can't take my eyes off his pale, relaxed baby face.
Envy? Or am I just tormented by my disappointment at not being able to
communicate with him even by glance or gesture?
I can't stay here. My body is going to sleep of its own accord. Up
and into the control room.
Repairs are still going on in the radio shack. Both mates are
working by the light of a strong bulb they brought with them to screw
into the socket, and they aren't wearing snorkels. Apparently they can't 
get the transmitter working. It's a job for a watchmaker. Probably the
necessary replacement parts are lacking. "Can't be done with available
materials," I hear Herrmann say. Always the same thing: "Not with
available materials as if they had any choice.
The emergency bulb sheds an ugly light that barely penetrates the
thick air. It doesn't even reach the walls, which are still in darkness.
Three, four shadowy figures are working by the forward wall, bent over
like miners at the end of a gallery. Wedged against the chart table with
his forearms outstretched on it, the Old Man is staring fixedly at the
chart. The machines have been stripped down, and the parts are still
strewn at random around the darkened room. Even the flooding and bailing
distributors are cluttered with pieces that don't belong there. Probably
parts of the main bilge pump. In the background the beam of a pocket
flashlight flits over the armatures and valves. I can just make out the
pale eye of the manometer in the gloom. The pointer remains at nine
hundred. I stare at it as if I can hardly believe my own eyes. No boat
has ever been this deep before.
It's getting colder all the time. Certainly we're not radiating
much body warmth, and heat is out of the question. Wonder how cold it is
outside?
Plaster altar: Gibraltar--plaster altar.
Now, thank god, the Chief arrives. He's moving with his usual
supple ease. Does that mean some kind of triumph? The Old Man turns to
him and hmms and hahs.
As hard as I try, all I hear is that the breaches have been sealed.
No sign of satisfaction from the Old Man.
"In any case, we can't surface before dark."
To this I can only nod. What I'd really like to toss in is "How
about _after?_"
I'm afraid they're betting on their hopes rather than on realities.
The man who just came through the control room from the stern has
doubtless heard what the Old Man said. It wouldn't surprise me if the Old
Man had formulated his sentence with "surface" in it just for him, so
that he can now go forward to report, "The Old Man just said something
about surfacing."
I'm still not clear in my own mind how much of the Old Man's
confidence is play-acting and how much conviction. In any case, whenever
he thinks he's unobserved, he looks years older: a mess of wrinkles, all
his face muscles slack, his reddened, swollen eyes half closed; at such
moments his whole body speaks resignation. But now that his back's
supported, he holds himself straight, arms folded on his chest, head
tilted slightly backward, so still he might be posing for a sculptor. I
can't even see whether he's breathing.
Without knowing exactly what I'm doing, I seem to have sat down in
the ring of the forward hatch.
Suddenly the Old Man's face is bending over me. Has he said
something? I must seem totally dazed as I pull myself to my feet, for he
produces a calming, "There, there." Then with a motion of his head he
urges me to accompany him astern. "Have to show our faces back there as
well."
I dig out the rubber mouthpiece with my fingers, swallow my saliva,
take a breath of air, and silently follow the Old Man. For the first time
I notice someone sitting on the chart chest: Turbo. His head is flopping
so loosely on his chest that his backbone might as well be broken. 
Someone is coming toward us: control-room mate Isenberg. Staggering like
a drunk. In his left hand he has long metal rods and electric cables, and
in his right a large pipe wrench that he's in the act of handing down to
someone crouching on the floor.
The Old Man halts at the level of the deserted hydroplane station
and surveys the dismal scene. The control-room mate hasn't yet noticed
us. Suddenly, however, he looks round as he hears the splashing of my
boots, and he straightens up, tries to stand, opens his mouth, and then
shuts it again.
"Well, Isenberg?" says the Old Man. The control-room mate swallows
but doesn't make a sound.
The Old Man takes a sideways step toward him and lays his right
hand on his shoulder--just for a second; but Tin-ear Willie blossoms
under it. He even manages a gratified grin. The Old Man gives two or
three short nods and then moves heavily on.
I know that the control-room mate will now be exchanging glances
with his men behind our backs. The Old Man! He's always managed. . .
The floor plates are still up in the petty officers' quarters. So
they're still working on battery two, or giving it another go-around. A
face streaked with sweat and oil pops up like an apparition from a stage
trapdoor. The wide beard identifies him as Pilgrim, the E-mate. More
dumbshow: for two or three seconds the Old Man and Pilgrim exchange
glances, then Pilgrim grins all over his filthy face. The Old Man allows
himself a questioning noise, then nods--and Pilgrim nods back eagerly: He
too is comforted.
It's hard to get through aft. The nimble Pilgrim tries to prop up a
piece of the floor plate from underneath so there will be room for us to
put our feet down.
"Don't bother," says the Old Man; like a mountain climber, his
belly pressed against the bunk railings, he traverses the narrow
footledge toward the stern. I accept Pilgrim's help.
The door to the galley is standing open. The galley itself has been
cleaned up. "Excellent," murmurs the Old Man. "Just as I expected."
The next door, to the diesel room, is standing open too. Usually
when the diesels are running and sucking in air, you have to exert all
your strength to overcome what is virtually a vacuum in the diesel room.
But the pulsing heart of the boat is dead.
Weak light from hand lamps; our eyes quickly adjust. My god, look
at it! The duckboards have been removed, the shining floor plates too.
For the first time I realize how far down the diesels extend. Between
their bases I can make out a jumble of heavy machine parts--oil pans,
tools, bushings. This is no longer a machine shop but a cannibal cave.
Everything drips with black lubricating oil--the spilled black blood of
machines. Repulsive poois of it have formed on all flat surfaces. Bunches
of waste lie about. Everywhere tattered rags, dirty packings, bent pieces
of pipe, asbestos boards black with finger marks, greasy nuts and bolts.
Whispering voices, the dull clang of a tool.
While Johann is whispering with the Old Man, he goes on working
with a gigantic wrench. I had no idea we had such heavy tools on board.
Johann's movements are precisely measured: no nervous errors, no
uncertain holds.
"Beam wedges in the leaks holding fast!"
The word "beam" sets me off again. Wood amid all this steel? Beam
defenses--that's naval vocabulary. Where else are there "beams"?
Then I actually see them: square timbers--five by five. Driven
tight with wedges like the supporting timbers in mines: exactly the same
system. The sheer amount of carpentry among all this steel and iron!
Where has the wood been stowed? I've never seen timber on board.
Where on earth does Johann get his calmness from? Does he simply
forget that we have nine hundred feet of water over our heads, and that
the oxygen will soon be running out? The Old Man peers here and there. He
kneels in order to get closer to the people working below deck, contorted
like fakirs. He says hardly a word, simply hums a little to himself and
produces his usual drawling "WeIl-l-l?"
But out of their narrow pits the oil-smeared faces look at the Old
Man as if he were a miracle worker. Their faith in his ability to get us
out of here must be without limit.
At the after end of the starboard diesel, the lamplight reveals two
or three men hunched over in cramped positions at the base of the
diesels; they're cutting large gaskets.
"Well, how do things look in general?" the Old Man asks in a hushed
voice, but warmly, the way he would inquire after the health of their
wives and children.
He's standing propped on one elbow for support; in the angle
between his arm and his body, I catch sight of the Chief. ". . . ribs
broken by the dozen," I hear him whisper. ". . . can't really get at the
problem anywhere!"
His face is thrown into exaggerated relief by one of the lamps.
Extreme exhaustion has put greenish semi-circles under his eyes, which
are burning feverishly. The lines in his face have deepened. He seems to
have aged ten years overnight.
I can't see his body, only his floodlit face. I give a start as the
pale, bearded head of John the Baptist speaks again. "Made a mess of the
cooling-water system too. Pretty fair job actually--soldered-- starboard
diesel--Herr Kaleun--seems to be--complete wipe-out-- not with available
materials--otherwise it'll go to pot--not balanced--driveshaft bearings .
. ."
There's something or other, as far as I can make out, that can only
be put right by heavy hammering. The two of them agree that any work
involving heavy hammering is out of the question.
Again the voice from below. "Thank god--that's halfway in working
order--damned hair-splitting--more of a job for a watchmaker . . ."
The Old Man orders, "Put everything you've got into it--it'll be
all right!" Then he turns to me as though he had a highly confidential
communication to make, but what comes out is a stage whisper. "Good thing
we've got a real specialist crew on board!"
The wrecked motor room is as horrifying as the diesel room: it's no
longer our sterile, clean, electric workshop with all the machine parts
hidden under steel hoods. The disguises have been torn away, the floor
plates removed; the innards lie exposed, naked. Here too everything is a
mass of oily waste, pieces of wood, tools. Wedges, cables, hand lamps, a
wire net. And there's still water down there. There's something obscene
about all this; something that looks like rape. The E-mate Rademacher is
lying on his stomach, the veins in his neck bulging with the strain as he
tries to tighten a base nut with an enormous wrench.
"A lot of field damage!" I say.
"Field damage: I like it," says the Old Man. "The paymaster will be
around right away to have a look at the trampled lettuce, then he'll take
care of our mere trifle out of his hip pocket--avoids bureaucracy!"
Rademacher hears his voice and starts to get up, but the Old Man
holds him down, then nods and pushes his cap to the back of his head.
Rademacher grins.
I discover a clock: twelve noon. So I _must_ have slept, off and
on. How could the clock have survived the explosion? My eyes fall on an
empty bottle. Thirst! Where in the world can I get something to drink?
How long is it since I've had anything? I'm not hungry: an empty belly,
but no hunger. Just this hellish thirst.
There's still a bottle--half full. But I mustn't make off with
Rademacher's juice.
The Old Man stands stiff as a post, thinking, his eyes fixed on the
breach-lock of the stern torpedo tube. Is he making a résumé?
Finally he remembers me, jerks round, and murmurs, "Well, back we
go again." Another pilgrim's progress past the halt, the blind, the
needy, and the damned. A repeat performance to make sure the show's made
its proper impact.
But this time the Old Man acts as if there were nothing special to
notice; as though everything were in order. A couple of hall-nods here
and there, and we're back in the control room. He steps up to the chart
table.
Oranges! Of course, we have oranges from the _Weser_. Two crates of
them were put aboard in the bow compartment--perfect, ripe oranges.
December, the best time for them. My mouth is trying to water, but my
throat is choked: a single mass of mucus that has blocked my salivary
glands completely. But oranges will clear all that away.
No one in the Quarters. The technicians are still aft. The
navigator was last seen in the control room. But where has the bosun
gone?
I try to open the hatch to the bow compartment as quietly as
possible. Feeble light, as usual: a single weak bulb. It takes me a good
minute to make out the scene in the gloom: men on bunks, men in hammocks;
everyone asleep. Men on the floor plates too, almost up to the hatch;
huddled close together like tramps trying to keep one another warm.
There've never been so many of them together in the bow
compartment. Suddenly I realize that not only the men off watch but also
the "lords" who would normally be on duty now are in here-- so it's
double occupancy.
The beam of my flashlight moves over the bodies. The place looks
like a battlefield. Worse still, the aftermath of a gas attack: men lying
in the half-darkness as if literally broken and twisted by pain, as if
their masks had been no protection against some new gas introduced by the
enemy.
It's reassuring to hear deep breathing and little smothered snores.
Probably no one would notice if the Chief turned off the oxygen
supply. They would go on just as calmly, dozing away with their pig
snouts over their faces and their potash cartridges on their stomachs,
Sleep, my little ones, sleep . . . Passed away, dozing for Volk and
Führer. . .
Isn't that someone moving over there, all hunched over? Hacker, the
torpedo mechanic. Stepping cautiously over the bodies as if he were 
looking for someone in particular. He has to stay awake to see to it that
no one lets the pig snout out of his mouth.
I begin to search for foot room. I have to force a way between the
sleeping men, search out crevices, push my foot like a wedge between
twisted bodies while taking care not to become entangled in the noose of
a snorkel tube.
The oranges must be stowed all the way forward beside the floor
breaches. I grope around until I touch first a crate and then a fruit,
which I roll and heft in my hand. I gulp. I can't bear to wait any
longer: standing there just as I am, both feet jammed between torsos,
arms and legs, I dig the snorkel out of my mouth and plunge my teeth into
the thick rind. It's not till my second bite that I get to the flesh of
the fruit. Sucking loudly, I swallow the juice. A lot of it runs out of
the corners of my mouth and drips onto the sleeping men. Bliss! I should
have thought of it long ago.
Someone moves beside my left foot; a hand seizes my calf; I jump as
though I'd been grabbed by an octopus. In this dim light I can't see who
it is. A face rises: a grisly lemur with a trunk. Coming out of the halfdarkness, the man scares me to death. I still can't recognize him:
Schwalle or Dufte? I stammer, "Damned good oranges!" But there's no
answer.
Hacker, who's still poking about, comes past, pulls out his
mouthpiece, and growls, "Rotten acoustics." In the beam of my flashlight,
long threads of spittle hang down from his chin. Dazzled, he closes his
eyes.
"Excuse me!"
"I'm looking for the cook," he whispers.
I point to a dark corner near the hatch.
Hacker wobbles his way over two men, bends down, and says in a low
voice, "Come on, up, up, Katter! Move. The men astern want something to
drink."
Nothing has changed in the Officers' Mess. The Second Watch Officer
is still asleep in his corner. I pull out one of the tattered volumes
from the shelf and compel myself to read. My eyes feel their way along
the lines. They move at their accustomed pace from left to right,
registering every syllable, every individual letter, but meanwhile my
thoughts drift away; peculiar connections take place in my brain.
Disparate texts intrude themselves between my eyes and the printed page:
sunken boats--what becomes of them? Does the shipwrecked U-boat armada
come sailing home to harbor some day, washed in on the tide along with
the mussels and the seaweed? Or do people lie here for the next ten
thousand years preserved in some kind of salt-water alcohol? And if a way
is eventually found to search the bottom of the sea and raise the ships?
How will we look then if our boat is cut open with a blow torch?
Actually we would offer the recovery team a marvelously peaceful
picture. In other sunken boats it would certainly look worse, with the
crew probably locked together in chaos, or floating, bloated, between the
diesel blocks. We are an exception. We'd be in a dry place.
No oxygen, so no rust, and above and beyond that, only the highest
quality U-boat materials. The salvage would certainly pay for itself: We
have any amount of valuable merchandise on board. And our provisions are 
certainly edible. Only the bananas, the pineapples, and the oranges would
be too far gone.
And as for ourselves? In general, how much do corpses decay without
oxygen? What becomes of fifty-one bladders full of urine, of the
fricassee and potato salad in our intestines once the oxygen is all gone?
Won't the fermentation process stop too? Do U-boat corpses become stiff
and dry like dried codfish or like the bishops that one sees high above
Palermo in Piana degli Albanesi? There they lie, under the altar
pictures, in their glass caskets, adorned with brocaded silk, colored
glass stones, and pearls: hideous but enduring. The difference is that
the bishops had been disemboweled. But if it rained uninterruptedly for a
couple of days, they stank just the same, as only codfish can stink,
through their glass panes.
Our ship's fly comes into mind. I see the boat being raised years
from now, covered with shaggy dark-green seaweed and thick clumps of
mussels. The tower hatch is broken open and out swarm a million fat,
greasy flies. Closeup of millions of _Battleship Potem kin_ maggots,
swarming over the hatch rim. And millions upon millions of crablice
covering the corpses of the crew like mange .
"Twilight!" I hear from the control room. What does that mean,
morning twilight or evening twilight? I'm totally confused.
The whispering voices come closer. The Old Man appears, and behind
him, the Chief.
The Chief is reporting to the Old Man. He seems to have a newfound
supply of strength, like a boxer getting his second wind after being
almost counted out in the previous round. God knows how he does it. He
hasn't had one moment away from the Second Engineer and his people. Now
he and the Old Man are drawing up a kind of provisional account. I hear
that the compressors have been rammed tight with wooden wedges. The
thumb-thick bolts that fastened them to their base plates had been
sheared off by the pressure wave of the explosion. Much depends on the
compressors: they supply the air for blowing out the buoyancy tanks. Both
periscopes are definitely in the ashcan. For the time being there's
nothing to be done there. Too complicated . . .
I can see that the Chief is beginning to radiate hope as he makes
his report.
Have our chances improved? I stop paying attention to detail. All I
want to know is whether the Chief is certain he can force the water
outboard and free the boat from the bottom. What do I care about the
periscope? I have only one wish: to get to the surface. God knows what
comes next. But first we have to get there. Just get there.
Not a word about bailing and outboard pumping. So what's the point
of all our other successful repairs if we can't free ourselves from the
bottom? Suddenly there are noises again, coming slowly closer.
Unmistakable. Ship's propellers. Louder and louder.
"Propeller sounds in all directions!"
What does that mean--a whole convoy? The Old Man rolls his eyes
like a tenant enraged by a brawl in the apartment overhead.
I look around helplessly. I am superfluous. I can only press myself
farther into my corner. Every bone in my body feels tortured, tormented.
That must be from swinging the buckets: a kind of violent charley horse.
The Old Man booms away in his usual voice. At first this terrifies
me, then I understand that with the uproar overhead it's safe to talk
aloud. No one can hear us. And the familiar hoarse growl is a comfort.
"Must be a tramc jam!" he says. The usual pretended indifference.
But he can't fool me: I've seen him secretly massaging his back with both
hands and heard him groan as he does so. He must have landed very
awkwardly when he fell, but since then he has only snatched the odd
fifteen minutes now and again to lie down.
The Chief isn't taking the din as well as the Old Man. When the
rumble deepens overhead, the words stick in his throat, and his eyes dart
this way and that. No one says a word. Dumbshow.
I wish the whole thing would reach its finale, so that the players
could finally cross the footlights with their everyday faces again.
The propeller noise stops. The Old Man looks me straight in the
face and nods in satisfaction, as though he had been the one to cut the
noise off--just to please me.
The Chief takes a hasty gulp from the bottle of apple juice and
disappears again.
I resolve to conquer my inhibitions and ask the Old Man straight
out how things stand, but at that moment he gets to his feet, grimacing
with pain, and plods heavily toward the stern.
After a while I can think of nothing better to do than follow him.
Perhaps I can lure him into conversation in the control room. But he's
disappeared. Must have gone farther astern. I have a nasty feeling that
something is all fouled up aft. I should have listened more carefully.
The fog in my brain is getting thicker. The best thing would be for
me to rest on my bunk. A man has to sleep sometimes. No point in just
sitting around.
I must have felt my way into the petty officers' compartment in a
trance. Now the trouble starts: I've had no practice wriggling into my
bunk with a potash cartridge over my stomach; however, by dint of a kind
of pole vault with a couple of very painful twists in it, I finally
manage. Now to start unbuttoning my shirt, loosen my belt, unbutton the
shirt further, all the way down, let my stomach swell as I breathe in,
then flatten again--stretch out, exhale, lie there in a kind of sheath
with my potash cartridge for a hot-water bottle; a mummy on a funeral
bier.
Consciousness dissolves. Is it sleep, or another kind of oblivion?
When I come to again, it's 17.00. Ship's time. I can tell from Isenberg's
wristwatch.
I remain in my bunk. The borderline between waking and sleeping
dissolves again. A dull booming echoes somewhere in my mind. Instead of
getting up I try to take refuge in sleep, but the noise persists. Eyes
closed, but awake, I listen. No doubt about it: depth charges. Trying to
terrify us? Or are the Tommies harrying some other boat? But it must be
broad daylight up there. No one would attempt a breakthrough in daylight.
So? Are they on maneuvers? Keeping their men up to the mark?
I strain to hear, try to locate the rolling thunder. It's cascading
all around us. Probably small units at work practicing encirclement. Now
it's quiet again. I lean out of my bunk and stare into the control room.
The sound man reports propeller noises, several at once, from
different directions. How can that be--the sound gear was supposed to be
a wreck. Then I remember at one point that the Old Man had an earphone
pressed to his head as I was squeezing past. So the sound gear is 
functioning again: We've got to the point where we can pick up acoustical
information about the enemy. Is that some kind of an advantage?
The oil leak! The current must have carried it so far away that
nobody up there can work out where it came from. Probably--cross fingers-
-there was one great bubble, and that was that. Luckily, oil doesn't
float forever like cork. It emulsifies and gradually disappears.
Viscosity--isn't that what they call it? Another word to add to my
collection of spells and incantations.
"We must be lying in a good spot," I hear the Old Man say in the
control room. Well, that's one way of looking at it: thank our lucky
stars that we're jammed in the rocks; because they've saved us from the
Asdic.
"Goddammit, if that noise doesn't stop, it'll drive me crazy!"
Zeitler suddenly bursts out. Against orders: Zeitler's supposed to keep
his pig's snout in his mouth and be quiet. Let's hope the Old Man didn't
hear him.
Zeitler's left arm is hanging out of the bunk over there. If I
squint hard, I can make out his wristwatch. 18.00 hours. No later? Losing
my watch was a bad omen. Must simply have fallen off my wrist. Perhaps
it's ticking away somewhere in the bilge. After all, it's _antimagnetic,
waterproof, shockproof, stainless, made in Switzerland_.
The nose clip is hurting so much that I have to loosen it for a
moment.
Christ, how it stinks! That's the gas from the battery! No, not
just the gas. It stinks of shit and urine, too--as if someone had had the
trots in here. Did someone's sphincter go while he was asleep? Or is
there a piss bucket standing around somewhere?
Piss: immediately I feel the desperate pressure in my own bladder.
The urge subsides, only to be succeeded by ominous stomach cramps. I
squeeze my thighs together. What if we all get the trots? The can is
unusable at these depths--no good trying to expel the stuff with
compressed air. The stench is becoming almost unbearable.
Better to put the clip back on my nose and breathe through the
rattling cartridge! Lucky that nature gave us a choice: nose or mouth. I
can simply opt for breathing by the second method; mercifully there are
no olfactory nerves in my jaws. The Lord of Heaven and Earth had more
foresight in kneading his clay than the designers of our scow did.
I can certainly hold out for a while longer. Stay flat, don't move,
relax your belly muscles, think of something else, Anything but piss and
shit.
In the whorehouse in Brest the smell was awful: sweat, perfume,
sperm, piss, and Lysol--a stomach-churning mixture--the smell of lust
gone rotten. _Eau de Javel_, they called the disinfectant, and no
perfume, however sweet, could prevail against it. Nose clips would have
been in order in that place too.
Rue d'Aboukir! When a big ship put in, the whores simply stayed on
their backs between tricks. No more squatting on the bidet, panties on,
being seductive, then panties off again: wornout cylinders of flesh with
five dozen different pistons working up and down in them day after day.
I can see the steep alley: leprous, crumbling walls, charred
timbers thrust into the air. A dead dog flattened on the broken pavement.
Disgusting. A whole swarm of blowflies swirling up from the squeezed-out
entrails. Fragments of tarboard. Bizarre wreckage of tile roofs like huge
pieces of layered nougat. Every single garbage can overturned. Rats in 
broad daylight. Every other house damaged by bombs; even the ones
partially intact are abandoned. Wooden window shutters piled up like
barricades. There's barely a footpath between the ruins and the garbage.
Beside a wall, two sealords leaning against each other, face to
face. "Come on, man, I'll pay for your fuck. You need it."
They're lined up at the bottom of the alley in front of the
sanitation room. Two rows of stiff cocks. Everyone has to go through.
From time to time the fat orderly shouts out of the door, "Next five . .
. and get your rocks off fast! You've each got five minutes--and that's
it!"
Idiotic grins. The bluejackets all have one hand in their trouser
pockets holding their balls or their cocks. And they almost all have a
cigarette in the other: nerves.
A miserable shed. All gray and shabby. Only the sanitation room is
painted white. The rest's like greasy oil--light rancid yellow. Smell of
semen and sweat. There's no bar. Not even the most primitive decoration.
The madam on her wooden throne has an obscene pug dog pressed
against her bosom, right in the middle of the cleavage between her two
massive tits. "Really looks like a fat ass," somebody remarks. "Boy,
would I like to fuck her there!"
The old harridan produces the bits of German she's picked up. "No
time. Move, move, don't break anything!"
Above her throne hangs a sign with a brightly colored rooster and
the legend: "_Quand ce coq chantera, crédit on donnera_."
While each man is paying her, she tries to sell him one of her
well-worn collection of photographs. Someone objects. "Auntie, nobody
needs instructions. I'm ready to shoot as it is. They'll be humping today
till nothing comes out but blue air."
Mattress squeaking through the stained wall.
A shrill nagging voice. "Come on, sweetheart, put the money right
there."
And I was so stunned that she spoke German!
"Don't look so dumb! _Fais vite!_ Sure, you're surprised!--I happen
to come from Alsace! No--no---d'you think I want to be fired? Everyone
has to pay in advance here, so let's see your money, darling. Paying is
always worse when you have to do it afterward. Come on--and put a little
extra for Lily on top--you're going to like her. Have you got another
fifty? If you do, there're some pictures I could show you--" And from
next door: "Come in, sweetie. God, talk about baby-snatching." Are they
all from Alsace? "Does your kindergarten have the day off today? That all
you can manage? No--keep your trousers on. And hurry up!"
At the bottom of the couch a strip of shabby oilcloth to go under
your shoes: taking them off here is considered a waste of time.
"Man, that was quick. Well, that's that."
Behind a screen I hear her pissing in a chamber pot. No niceties.
Pale thighs. Wet pubic hair. Sickly face streaked with powder.
Yellow teeth, one or two rotting and black. Breath reeking of Cognac. Red
gash of mouth. Whitish intestinal ropes of used condoms tangled up in the
wastebasket beside the bidet.
Cursing in the corridor. "Money back--too much beer--I can never
get it up."
Downstairs a man is protesting against the injection.
"Then you won't get your paybook back!"
"Listen, I didn't go bareback!"
"Shut up. Everyone gets a shot here."
"I guess you get a free fuck, don't you?"
"Just be careful, man!"
"Oh kiss my ass!"
What a job! Injecting cocks all day long!
"There, you're done. Here's your paybook back. Double precaution: a
rubber _and_ a shot. They're real sticklers for etiquette in the Navy!"
The pressure in my bladder is driving me mad. Didn't the bosun set
out buckets in the control room with a can of calcium chloride beside
them? I struggle up and manage to get there, stiff-legged. Afterward, the
Chief appears. Breathing heavily, he sits down beside me and stays very
still. Only his chest moves. He purses his lips and inhales, which
produces a whistle. He jumps, startled by the sound.
I pluck the pig snout out of my mouth. "Chief, I still have some
glucose tablets." The Chief jerks himself back into reality. "No thanks,
but a mouthful of apple juice wouldn't be bad."
I push myself up quickly, work my way through the hatch, stagger to
the locker, and reach for the bottle. The Chief puts it to his mouth with
one hand but then has to use the other because the bottle is rattling
against his teeth. He takes huge gulps. A trickle runs over his lower lip
and is caught in his beard. He doesn't even wipe it off.
Shall I ask him how things stand? Better not. From the way he
looks, it might be the last straw.
In the petty officers' compartment the curtains of the bunks on the
port side are open but the bunks aren't empty. Their occupants look like
corpses laid out in their coffins. Zeitler, Ullmann, the Berliner, and
Wichmann. Only the pig snouts don't belong.
The bunks of the engine-room crew are empty. So the diesel mates
and the motor mates are still aft. I stretch out on the nearest lower
bunk.
The First Watch Officer appears. Looking officiously concerned, he
makes sure that everyone still has his snorkel in his mouth. As I stare
after him I realize that I'm drifting off to sleep again.
When I come to, I recognize Frenssen. The way he looks, sitting
there at the table, completely exhausted, goes straight to my heart. He
has no snorkel. Of course--the men who have to work in the engine room
can't wear this damnfool contraption. I make a noise rolling over, and
Frenssen slowly turns his head. He stares at me blankly. His spine no
longer seems able to support the weight of his torso. Instead of propping
himself up on the table, he lets his shoulders sag and his arms dangle
between his knees as though they had no joints but hung on strings, like
primitive marionettes. He seems to be doubly prone to normal gravity. His
mouth is open; his glassy stare is terrifying. God, he's going off the
rails! Who knows how the others are holding out in this fetid air if
Frenssen can no longer carry on. This bull of a man--and he's as weak as
a fly.
Fly? Where's our fly?
The thought of an underwater Christmas returns. If the men aft
don't get finished, we'll still be sitting here on Christmas Eve.
There'll be an exchange of gifts. I'll catch the fly as my present to the
Old Man. Put it in an empty match box, one with a pretty Spanish label,
which the Old Man can hold against his ear, so that if the fly is 
buzzing, he can imagine that the motors are running again. Brilliant! And
we'll make the Chief close his eyes and listen to the little box too. And
if the Old Man agrees, it can even go the rounds and they can all listen
to it for a whole minute--God's gift to our ears in all this silence,
another blessing to celebrate along with the birth of our Lord.
I feel wretched, exhausted. I'd love to tell Frenssen, "I'll just
see where the tea is," or some such nonsense, but with the snorkel I
can't. He doesn't move an inch.
The tea! The pot must be in the control room; I must have seen it
while I was in there.
I get up painfully. Frenssen hardly raises his eyes. In the control
room the floor plates are still covered with water, so our worst problem
hasn't been cleared up. No doubt the Chief will get around to it. He has
his plan, of course, but the sight of this flood, and my boots splashing
in it, fills me with horror just the same.
The tea: I look around, but the pot's nowhere to be seen. I do know
where the apple juice is, however. I clamber through the hatch and
shuffle to the locker, get a bottle out, tear off its top on a hinge, and
bring it to Frennsen. Dear god, it takes him long enough to realize that
it's for him. He could have spared himself the look of dog-like
gratitude--after all, I'm not the Old Man.
Nothing more to do but go on sitting here conjuring up pictures.
Glückstadt comes to mind. That helps: immediately I turn bitter.
The humiliations! Gluckstadt--Happy City. The name itself was pure
mockery. That's the way it always went: barracks, barrack rooms, barracks
again. First fatigue duty and then the naval Mickey Mouse. Gluckstadt was
the worst--_nomen est omen_--a superstition.
The Greasy Spoon restaurant in town!--it had a different name, of
course--where we spent our evenings eating fried potatoes by the plateful
because we didn't get enough at camp. Three of us had to report because
the owner heard about our name for his wretched dump. Confined to
barracks; assigned to eternal Mickey Mouse--the main thing was to yell at
the top of your voice. My specialty: leading a detachment into open
country, and telling the men to disappear into the dugouts for a quick
game of cards while I stood around roaring orders over the landscape like
a maniac. I enjoyed that--and everyone else did too.
I see myself in the cutter, at the end of my strength, clinging to
my oar and almost tumbling from the thwart. The mean, coarse faces of the
mates, who made a kind of game out of pursuing, harassing, and bullying
us new recruits. I see now-what they did to Flemming, poor, pathetic,
nervous Flemming, who was handed over helpless to a collection of sadists
in uniform. Into fatigues, out of fatigues! Rigging gear on, rigging gear
off. Dress uniform on, dress uniform off, sports outfit on, sports outfit
off. "Move it, move it, you shitheads!"
Five minutes later: locker inspection.
Poor Flemming never caught up. He began to have the wild look of a
trapped rat. And if the bastards noticed someone who couldn't defend
himself, they really went to town. On the double, three times around the
barracks, once around crawling. A hundred yards' rabbit hop. Twenty pushups. Up and over the walls on the assault course.
And then the special treats for all of us: to pull the cutter at
full speed into the slime and then work it loose again, float it free--
but only by hauling on the oars, pulling in rhythm on them for hours at a
time until there was clear water under the cutter.
Poor Flemming didn't, couldn't, hold out.
One evening he was missing at roll call.
The mutilated corpse was washed up in the harbor, among the old
fenders, bottles, pieces of wood, and puddles of lubricating oil.
It was a straight case of murder. Systematically harassed to death.
He'd drowned himself in desperation, even though he could swim. His
corpse wasn't a pretty sight: It had got caught in the propellers of a
steamer. I had to go to Hamburg to the hearing. Now that it's gone this
far, I thought to myself, the shit will really hit the fan. But what
happened? His dear relatives, fine Hamburg shipowners, found the idea of
suicide unpalatable. So they stuck to the Navy version: accidental death
in the course of duty! For Volk, Führer, and Vaterland. In loyal
performance of his duty. Apparently they couldn't bear to forego the
three salvos over the grave, so we fired our rifles over Flemming's hole
in the ground. Salute--raise rifles--fire. And then again. And again. No
one was even allowed to smile.
And then in France: the way I wrenched the pistol away from
Obermeier, the radio announcer, when he was going to shoot himself on the
beach in front of our requisitioned villa. What a farce, just because
he'd had an affair in Paris with a lady who turned out to be half Jewish.
Asshole Obermeier behaving like a madman, roaring, "I am a National
Socialist! Give me my pistol, give me my pistol back!" It wouldn't have
taken much for me to do him the favor.
I begin to choke. My mouth is swollen full; it tastes as bitter as
gall. I can't stand the snorkel any longer. My mouth ejects it almost
involuntarily. Saliva dribbles onto my shirt. I study it intently. I need
a drink. Frenssen won't hold it against me if I reach for his bottle.
What the hell's that? My wristwatch lying on the table! Who put it
there? I reach for it, feel as if my Christmas has come early. The sweep
second hand is still hurrying around the dial. A good watch. It says a
little after zo.oo.
Which means we've already been down here almost twenty-four hours.
The Commander wanted to try surfacing when it got dark. zo.oo--then it
must have been pitch black up there for a long time. At this time of
year. But why did the Commander ask the navigator when the moon set? I'm
not mixing this up. The Old Man asked twice, after all--just a couple of
hours ago. But wasn't there a new moon a short time ago? That means
almost no light at all, let alone setting. So what? The usual dilemma: no
one to ask--neither the Old Man nor the navigator. Apparently it will
only be really dark somewhere around four a.m.
That would mean the whole night to go. Another whole night--
unendurable. The oxygen won't last that long. And what about the potash
cartridges?
Restlessness forces me to move. I head for the Officers' Mess in a
trance. My place on the Chief's bunk is unoccupied. The Second Watch
Officer has disappeared. This day seems to have lasted a hundred hours
already.
I don't know how long I've been dozing in the corner of the bunk
when I wake up and recognize the Old Man in the gangway to the Officers'
Mess. He's supporting himself with both hands as though we were in a
surface vessel in a heavy sea. He must have come out of his cubbyhole.
Feebly he lets himself onto the Chief's bunk beside me. He looks gray and
exhausted, seems completely unaware of me, absentminded. For a good five
minutes he doesn't utter a syllable. Then I hear him mutter, "I'm sorry."
I sit there as if turned to stone. "I'm sorry." The words echo in
my head.
Two words, and the Commander has stamped out all hope. The renewed
clutch of fear. No hope. That's what it must mean. Dream exploded. A few
more charades, some stiff upper lip.. . and that's it. The whole
exercise, all our efforts--nothing but bullshit. I knew it: We'll be
stuck here till Judgment Day.
We might still have had a chance to swim for it. Overboard as soon
as we surfaced. But now--what now? Slowly fall asleep as the oxygen gives
out?
I take the snorkel out of my mouth although I don't want to talk.
My hands do it automatically. Intelligent hands that say to themselves:
What's the point? Why this snorkeling if there's no chance left? Threads
of saliva drip from my mouth, grow longer and longer. Like trumpeters
emptying their U-shaped mouthpieces.
I turn to look directly at the Old Man. His face is a lifeless
mask. I have a feeling that I could peel the mask away, but then I know
for certain that I would have to look at raw flesh and sinews, like a
picture from an anatomy book: spherical eyeballs, bluishwhite; branching
fibers; narrow tubes and veins; bands of muscle.
Have the Old Man's exertions finally done him in? It can't possibly
be true! "I'm sorry." He can't have meant it seriously.
He doesn't move an inch. I can't catch his eye because he's staring
down at the floor in front of him.
Fear of the emptiness in my head. I don't dare go to pieces now.
Mustn't let myself go. Keep an eye on myself and don't let the Old Man
out of my sight.
No doubt about it: He's all in. Why else would he say something
like that?
Perhaps everything is starting to work for us, only the Old Man
doesn't realize it. What can I do? Tell him that everything will still
turn out all right? That when the need is greatest, the Lord is nigh?
Revolt. No! His two-word judgment can't take away my secret
knowledge that I'm going to escape. Nothing can happen to me. I am taboo.
Through me the whole boat is immune.
But doubt sets in again. I'd realized it before--only not admitted
it: It's dark up there, has been for hours, and we were going to surface
at dark. So we should have tried long ago. All that talk about the moon--
nothing but pretext.
The Old Man continues to sit there motionless as though all the
life had drained out of him. Not even the blink of an eye. I've never
seen him this way before . . .
I try to shake off the stranglehold, try to swallow, try to choke
down my fear.
A tapping sound.
I stare into the aisle. There stands the Chief, supporting himself
left and right against the walls the way the Old Man just did. I try to
read his face. But he's standing in semi-darkness, and his face remains a
blur.
Why won't he come into the lamplight? Has everyone here gone mad?
Why doesn't he sit down with us at the table? Surely not because his
shirt is torn? Because his arms are smeared all the way up with filth?
His mouth is open. Probably wants to make a report. Waiting for the
Old Man to look up. Finally he moves his lips and takes his hands 
cautiously away from the walls. Must want his gestures to underline what
he has to say. But the Old Man keeps his head down. Probably hasn't
noticed him standing six feet away in the gangway.
I'm about to give him a push to bring him out of his trance, when
the Chief clears his throat and the Old Man lifts his eyes irritably.
Instantly the Chief is talking. "Respectfully report to Herr Kaleun--Emotors ready--water taken aboard has been pumped into regulator cells--
possible to expel it outboard with compressed air-- compass system ready-
-echo sounder ready. .
The Chief falters. His voice is hoarse. From now on I hear nothing
but an endless echo. "Ready ... ready. . . ready. . ."
"Good, Chief. Good, good!" stutters the Old Man. "Just get some
rest now!"
I stagger to my feet to make room for the Chief. But he stammers ".
. - still some problems--still a couple--to clear up," and takes two
steps backward before executing a kind of aboutface. He's going to fall
over any minute. No longer has the strength of an insect. One puff, and
you could blow him over.
The Old Man has his elbows braced on the table and half his lower
lip is between his teeth. Why doesn't he say something?
Finally he lets go and blows out hard. "Good men--simply have to
have--good men!"
He lays the palms of both hands on the table, shifts his weight
forward, and pushes himself heavily to his feet, then squeezes his way
slowly past, hitches his belt up in the gangway, and sets off toward the
stern wobbling like a drunk.
I sit there stunned, holding my mouthpiece in my lap with both
hands. Did I just dream all that? But the Old Man really has vanished.
Where to? He was sitting here just a moment ago . . . "I'm sorry." And
then ". . . ready. . . ready . . . ready!"
Where is everyone? I'm about to shout when I hear voices from the
control room. ". . . going to try! . . . have to see if it'll work!"--
"When d'you think you'll be more or less ready?" That's the Old Man's
voice. And it's sounding urgent. "Haven't much time left."
My head's spinning again. What am I doing still sitting around
here? I replace my rubber mouthpiece. I'm wobbly too: I can hardly get to
my feet. At each step it feels as if someone's hitting me in the back of
the knees.
In the control room, the Old Man, the Chief, and the navigator, all
with their heads together. A tight little group around the chart table.
The usual mocking voice starts whispering in my ear: here we go
again, stretching out the action, spinning out the scene, milking it for
everything it's got--a real crowd pleaser--the group of conspirators and
their muffled whispers--always works.
Then I notice: no more water in the control room. Dry feet. Missed
it before. Blackouts. Am I actually in my right mind now?
I hear the Old Man ask in a hushed voice, "What's it like up there
now, navigator?"
"Been dark for some hours, Herr Kaleun!"
The Old Man obviously has himself under control again. And the
navigator knew the answer. Nothing confuses him, he's right on the ball.
The control-room mate is fiddling about among the flooding and
bailing distributors. I can see that he's straining to hear. He can't
catch complete sentences either, but such fragments as we manage to pick 
up are sufficient tidings of salvation. I'm just surprised that I don't
go to pieces and fall flat on my face.
"The one chance--all right!" mutters the Old Man. Then he looks at
his watch, pauses, and his voice is steady. "In ten minutes we take her
up!" It comes out like any casual announcement.
"We take her up." The four words repeat themselves in my brain like
a mantra. I take the rubber mouthpiece out of my mouth again. The thread
of saliva breaks and then forms again.
"I'm sorry".. . "We take her up"!--it's enough to drive you mad.
I climb back into the Officers' Mess. The Second Watch Officer is
lying in his bunk.
"Hey, Second Watch Officer!" I don't recognize my own voice.
Somewhere between a croak and a sob.
He barely moves.
I try a second time. "Hey!" This time it sounds a bit better.
He feels with both hands for the tube of his mouthpiece, clasps it
like a baby with its bottle. He obviously doesn't want to wake up.
Doesn't want to lose the safety of sleep, wants to hold on to this
barrier between him and insanity. I have to seize him by the arm and
shake him. "Hey, buddy, wake up!"
His eyes open for a second, but he still refuses to be wakened. He
tries to get away from me, to retreat into unconsciousness.
"We surface in ten minutes!" I whisper close to his face.
He blinks distrustfully but takes the snorkel out of his mouth.
"What?" he asks, bewildered.
"We're going to surface!"
"What did you say?"
"Yes, in ten minutes!"
"Honest?"
"Yes, the Commander . . ."
He doesn't leap to his feet. Not even a look of joy on his face. He
simply leans back and closes his eyes again for a moment--but now he's
smiling. He looks like someone who knows that a surprise party is being
arranged for him--and who wasn't supposed to have found out about it yet.
XI RETURN VOYAGE
"Prepare to surface!"
The order echoes through the boat.
The Commander: "First Watch Officer and navigator after me to the
bridge!"
In the control room the First Watch Officer and the navigator pick
out their oilskins, climb into their trousers, staggering as though we
were rocking in a heavy sea, and pull their stiff jackets over their
heads. They avoid looking at each other. Set faces, like hairdressers'
dummies. The navigator seems to be demonstrating an exercise: He puts his
sou'wester on very slowly--like a drillmaster, taking his time. He
fastens the strings under his chin with deliberate care.
I realize for the first time what it is that I'm breathing--a
stinking vapor suspended in dense layers throughout the boat, sour and
suffocating. My lungs heave as they try to filter enough oxygen out of
it.
Will the boat really come clear? And if she does, what then?
In answer to this unspoken question, the Old Man orders: "Prepare
escape gear!"
So that's the idea: up, overboard, and swim for it. In the dark? In
that racing current?
My film! I hurry to my bunk. Everything's lying ready, the escape
gear and the film wrapped in a waterproof package, arranged so that I can
hang it around my neck.
There's also a more deep-seated fear in me--worse than that of the
darkness and the current--enemy fire. If the fingering searchlight from
one of their corvettes finds us, we might as well be lying center stage
with all the lights up. Then more searchlights will be added, and the
heavens will be festooned with star shells. Goddam Christmas trees! And
then the machine guns will cut loose.
But of course we might be lucky. The craziest things happen:
Perhaps they won't find us right away. But if we're in the water and they
miss us at _that_ point, we'll be swept away anyhow.
Distress lights! _We_ have no distress blinkers. The Tommies are
better equipped; they're all prepared to go overboard. But a situation
like ours had no place in our leaders' calculations. The escape gear's
our only equipment for disaster at sea.
I'm not very good at putting mine on. No practice. Never thought
I'd have to use the thing. Frenssen helps me. Tentatively I insert the
mouthpiece. Another snorkel. No end to them. Cautiously I turn on the
oxygen tank and hear it hiss. Good: seems to be working.
Suddenly there is whispering and movement all around, and the
terror subsides.
Everyone's wearing his escape gear, fumbling around with it,
pretending to be frantically busy, just to keep from having to look up.
I catch the Second Watch Officer's eye. Trying to look calm but not
succeeding. He makes a face to conceal his emotion.
The razor's edge: The Chief will release the compressed air, and
we'll discover whether blowing the regulator cells and filling the
buoyancy cells will provide enough lift to free us from the bottom. We
still don't know whether the exhaust valves of the buoyancy tanks will
remain airtight. We have only one shot at it. There will be no second
chance.
In a clear voice the Commander orders: "Blow!" The controlroom mate
turns his valves. The compressed air hisses into the tanks. Will it force
the water out? We stand there rigid, listening. Is the boat moving?
I flex my knees so that I can detect the slightest motion.
Nothing! Held fast. Heavy as lead!
The compressed air blows and blows.
Nothing!
Abandon hope, all ye who . . . the whole thing's been in vain! My
legs start to wobble . . .
But. The boat definitely moved! And now there's a scraping contact
on the outside like the impact of Asdic beams. A screech, shrill as a
knife on porcelain, runs through me to the bone, and the needle of the
depth manometer trembles.
There's a clearly perceptible jerk and the boat frees itself from
the bottom. It scrapes groaning along a reef. More screeching and
yowling. And then--silence.
I'm choking with joy.
I hold fast to the tower hatch ladder, my eyes fixed on the needle.
For god's sake, _keep on_ wobbling. I hypnotize it. It jerks three or
four marks backward. The boat is floating, rising--under its own
momentum--like a free balloon. We're actually buoyant.
I stare over the Commander's shoulder at the manometer needle. As
does everyone else. Very slowly it creeps back over the dial. No movement
in the control room. Not a word.
The needle turns with agonizing slowness. I want to take my hand
and push the thing backward, as if that could keep the boat rising.
"Eight hundred feet!" says the Chief, as if we didn't all know
already.
"Seven twenty-five!--Six fifty!--Six hundred!"
Periscope observation is out. Both periscopes wrecked. So the
Commander won't even be able to make sure whether it's all clear or not.
I quickly push this thought aside and concentrate on the depth manometer
again. The boat is slowly continuing to rise.
"Five hundred fifty!"
The Commander is already under the tower when the indicator reaches
the four hundred mark.
The minutes stretch out like slack elastic.
We stand around stiffly. I don't even dare shift my weight from one
foot to the other. With his escape gear on over his fur-lined vest, the
Old Man looks like a freak.
When the needle reaches two hundred, he orders the lights in the
control room shaded. All that's left is the pale twilight that comes in
from both sides through the open hatches, hardly enough to enable us to
distinguish silhouettes.
We rise as slowly as an elevator being cranked up by hand after a
power failure. Now I do shift from foot to foot. Slowly, cautiously. So
no one will notice.
The sound gear is in action: Herrmann. He must be getting a mass of
bearings; he'll only report if something is quite close. But there's
nothing. Apparently we're in luck.
"Seventy feet--fifty feet!"
The water in the Papenberg column is already sinking. The Commander
clambers heavily up the ladder.
"Tower hatch free!" the Chief reports.
I swallow. There are tears in my eyes.
The boat begins to move, rocking gently back and forth. And then a
slapping noise: _Tschjwumm--tschjwumm!_ A wave hitting the side.
Now everything speeds up, as usual. The Chief reports, "Boat's
clear!" And the Old Man shouts down, "Equalize pressure!"
A sharp bang. The tower hatch has sprung open. So the equalization
was not complete. The air falls down on us in a solid mass. My lungs fill
painfully, then they stop--the oxygen is too rich for them. I stagger.
The pain literally forces me to my knees.
For god's sake, what's going on up there? The glare of parachute
flares? Has the Old Man seen something? Why no orders?
The boat rocks gently back and forth. I hear the splashing of small
waves. The boat resounds like a gong.
Finally the Old Man's bass voice. "Prepare to blow!"
Still darkness in the circle of the hatch. "Stand by to ventilate!"
And then, "Diesel room, remain ready to dive!"
Diesel room ready to dive? But this gulp of air belongs to me. And
this one too. Wet, dark, night air! I expand my ribcage, breathe my fill.
Again the splashing of the waves: _a Kyrie eleison_. I could hug
the Chief.
Then from above, "Ready with the diesel!" I pass on the order,
shouting louder than I have to.
The call goes from mouth to mouth to the engine room. The escape
gas doors for the working diesel, the compressed-air cylinders, the test
valves are now being opened; they're finding out whether the diesel has
taken water, and putting it in gear on the driving shaft.
The engine room reports ready--and it's the Old Man again. "Port
diesel half speed ahead!" The helmsman in the tower echoes the command; I
shout it toward the stern.
The blowers snarl. The first shaking pulse runs through our frame.
The diesel sucks fresh air down into the boat in great waves. All
the doors stand open so that it can reach into every corner.
The noise envelops me. I want to block my ears. They must be able
to hear us from Africa to Spain. And the whole area must be crawling with
lookouts. But what's the Old Man to do? We have no choice. We can't
tiptoe.
If only I knew what it looked like up there!
The Old Man orders the navigator to the bridge. The First Watch
Officer is beside me, also staring upward. He's holding onto a rung of
the ladder with his right hand, I with my left. My mirror image.
Three, four orders to the helmsman in quick succession--then a
counter-order. "Belay hard a-port! Continue to steer two hundred fifty
degrees!"
The helmsman no longer acknowledges the orders properly; he's
getting muddled. But there's no rebuke.
"Well, well, well!" is all I hear from the Commander; the last
"well" long drawn out. Not exactly a superfluity of information, but
enough to tell us that we've just missed hitting something.
Clench your teeth. Hope the Old Man knows what he's doing. He's had
practice, after all: mocking the enemy, flitting about right under their
noses, showing them our narrow silhouette, always staying against a dark
background, always according to the rules of the game.
The First Watch Officer sniffs hard, then breathes through his
wide-open mouth. He might at least say something. Following his rules
we'd have been up the creek. What the Old Man's doing isn't something you
learn in training courses. He got us in this far on our quiet motors; now
he has to use one racketing diesel and sneak us out again. The
breakthrough into the Mediterranean has failed.
I seem to be sniffling too. We've all caught cold a little. I put
my left foot on the lowest rung, using it like a bar rail. The First
Watch Officer does the same with his right.
Once more the navigator's voice is too low. I can't catch more than
half his reports. "Object . . . degrees!--object bearing thirty-- edging
our way--"
"Seems to be as much traffic here as on the Wannsee," from behind
me. The Second Watch Officer! Our baby! He can play as tough as he likes, 
but he can't fool me. I'll always see him crouched in the corner of the
bunk: out for the count, the straw dog in his arms.
He's moved very close: I can hear him breathing.
A crowd seems to be collecting in the control room. Understandable
that the off-duty watch no longer feels like staying in their quarters.
Too remote. Everyone who can find an excuse to be close to the tower is
here. Fortunately no one notices them in the darkness. Despite the roar
of the diesel I can clearly hear the hissing of compressed air from one
of the little steel cylinders in the escape gear-- and another one. Two
men at least are now in position to go overboard.
My heart beats in my throat. Supposing they spot us--we can't dive.
A bewildering series of orders to the helmsman: "Port--starboard--
midships--as she goes--hard a-port--" The Old Man's making the boat weave
along like a snake.
I can't believe that we're still undetected--that the Tommies
haven't raised a general alarm, that we're not being attacked on all
sides by everything they've got. Someone _must_ have heard us or seen us.
They can't _all_ be asleep. Or can the noise of the diesel actually be
protecting us? Do the men on lookout take us for a British boat? But
Tommy boats have different towers. Yes, I tell myself, that may be true,
seen from the side, but from the front with a small silhouette, there
certainly can't be much difference.
Again the short sharp hiss of an oxygen tank in the safety gear. If
only we don't have to go overboard.
And if there's another airplane?
But that, after all, was no routine flight. We'd been reported.
They could figure our course by dead reckoning and be ready at the right
time. But nothing has been reported today. So the planes will remain
grounded.
The Second Watch Officer clears his throat. His voice is squeaky.
"First we have to get far enough westward, I imagine."
The Old Man is silent for a good five minutes. I visualize the
chart: Yes, make a large arc toward the west in order to avoid the
traffic around Cape Saint Vincent.
If only I were allowed onto the bridge! TO SEE!
The sky seems to sympathize: The cloud cover opens and a few stars
appear. They move in the circle of the hatch from right to left, left to
right. I wonder what their names are. The navigator would know. But he's
above.
"Port twenty--new course two hundred seventy degrees!"
A minute, then the helmsman reports, "Two hundred seventy degrees
it is."
"Ship's time?" the Commander calls down.
"21.30 hours!" the helmsman answers from the tower.
So, about an hour since we surfaced. What speed can we make on one
diesel?
I don't even know exactly how fast it's running. With two diesels I
would be able to tell from the sound. But I've had no practice deducing
our speed from just one. And we're charging with the dynamo as we run. We
need all the power we can get. With any luck, our remaining battery cells
will store enough to get us through tomorrow. It's obvious, without
anyone actually having to say it, that we'll have to give up running on
the surface by first light. The Chief will have to keep us going at
periscope depth, and hope for the best.
Finally a few fragments from above. ". . . well-l-l, navigator,
he's going away. I'm sure of it. Just keep an eye on that approaching
vessel. Way off--but nasty just the same."
After five minutes the Commander asks, "What's our course?"
"Two hundred seventy degrees!"
"Steady as she goes!"
"How many miles will we make before it gets light?" I ask the First
Watch Officer.
He snorts. "Maybe twenty."
"Running quite well."
"Yes, seems to be."
I feel a hand on my upper arm, and jump.
"How does it look now?" asks the Chief.
"Someday I'll grab you in the dark too!" I blurt out. "Satisfactory
is the way it looks--as far as I can tell."
"Pardon me, your worship!" says the Chief.
"And how are things with you, Chief?"
"Thanks for asking. _Comme ci, comme ça!_"
"An exhaustive report!"
"Just wanted to get a bit of air," he explains and disappears
again.
"Seems we're not welcome with the Macaronis," I hear behind me.
That must have been Isenberg. He's right: La Spezia! I'd forgotten all
about our intention to go there. The beautiful blue Mediterranean. Now
Rommel will have to figure out a way of getting his supplies across
without us. After all, we're an Atlantic boat. It's up to the Italians to
look out for Mediterranean convoys.
Are we the only boat? Or were there others they were trying to flog
through?
If we succeed in getting far enough west--what then? One day
underwater, at periscope depth, is all very well. But after that? We
can't dive. The boat won't stand more than periscope depth. Is our
transmitter working? There's been no talk of signaling. How many miles to
the next French port? Or will the Old Man park our demolished scow at
Vigo again and route-march us home through Spain--the whole crew this
time?
If the weather gets worse, how are we going to get through Biscay?
As it is, daylight travel is out of the question. We can no longer elude
an airplane, and Biscay is teeming with them. Proceed at night and remain
submerged by day? Granted, the nights are long, but will it work?
"Hold it . . . steady as she goes!" I hear from above,
The Old Man has changed course. He's heading farther south. The old
game: he thinks the Tommies think--may think--that if more boats try to
break through, they'll do it by the shortest route. Which is to say that
if they're coming from the north or mid-Atlantic they won't go below
thirty-six degrees. So we should stay south of thirty-six degrees. For
the time being, that is.
If I've got it right, we must be in the neighborhood of Cape
Spartel again. Or else farther west, but at the same latitude. The
navigator hasn't time for his dead reckoning right now, and there's no
one to take his place. So there'll be a pretty big hiatus on his course
chart.
I notice that both Watch Officers have disappeared. I can hardly
stay on my feet either. Fewer orders to the helmsman. So we must have got
through the circle of patrols unscathed.
"Permission to come on the bridge?" I ask.
"_Jawohl_," from the Old Man.
I can hardly move a muscle. Been standing so long. Painfully I
climb past the helmsman--the Berliner. Wind strikes me in the face before
I can look over the bulwark.
"Well-l-l?" the Old Man asks in a drawl.
I can't say a word. Peer around--no shadows--nothing. Thereon the
port side a string of lights: nine or ten. What can that be? The African
coast? Hard to believe!
I push myself up and take a look at the foreship. It shimmers in
the pale moonlight. The upper deck looks so empty. Despite the darkness I
can see that the gratings have been ripped apart in some bizarre fashion.
Of the cannon nothing remains but the mounting. How must the forward side
of our tower look? The fairing has certainly been torn to bits.
The Old Man, standing beside me, says, "Rather impressive, isn't
it?"
"I'm sorry?"
"Impressive--all that." His voice subsides into a murmur. All I can
hear is, "Jesus and his flock. . . sheep may safely graze."
The navigator interrupts. "Thought _He_ was always with the
Tommies--_they're_ the ones with the whiskey."
Bad jokes! At a time like this!
More lights. The Old Man gives orders. We weave to and fro while
maintaining a generally westerly course. First, just get away. Put space
between us and them.
"How long can we keep it up, navigator?"
"A good hour still, Herr Kaleun!"
All I want to do is stand here and breathe easily, listen to the
beating of my heart, let my eyes roam over the horizon, hear the hissing
of the bow wave. I receive a dash of spray and taste it on my tongue:
salty. Seeing, tasting, hearing, smelling the night air. Feeling the
motion of the boat. Responding with all my senses--I am alive!
I tip my head back. Here and there a few stars. Torn cloud cover
that barely moves and shades the sickle moon. For us, resurrection has
dawned--except that it was by night, and nobody else is even aware of it.
In Kernével we count as sunk. The Tommies will have certainly reported
that much promptly. _They_ can use their radio as much as they like. We
can't. Admittedly someone said that our transmitter might work, but we
have to be very careful not to call attention to ourselves. The Tommies
are too much on the alert; they can get bearings from even the briefest
radio messages.
"All right then," mutters the Old Man. "Another hour and we'll pack
it up! I think we can let the watch come on deck--eh, navigator?"
"Think so, Herr Kaleun!"
"Second watch, stand by!" the Commander calls below. "Well," he
says to me.
"I can't understand it!"
"What can't you understand?"
"That they're letting us ramble around this way."
"Nor can I," the Old Man says dryly. "But it's typical of them. My
old rule is: Keep going! This would never have happened with _me_."
"What wouldn't?"
"_We_ wouldn't--be sailing around again, that is! Don't stop till
the Commander's cap floats up--old rule."
My jaws drop open in sheer amazement. Professional criticism of
enemy technique. If the Tommies had done things the Old Man's way, we'd
have been totally wiped out by now.
"You ought to hit the sack for a while," he says. He sounds
slurred, like one drunk giving another drunk advice, convinced that he's
sober.
"I'm all right for a while," I say casually, but when I hear that
the second watch is ready, I report down from the bridge all the same.
The stinking buckets have disappeared. The calcium chloride too.
Situation normal. The ventilators are humming. Everything cleaned up. For
a wonder, stateroom H is free.
All's quiet in the petty officers' compartment. Three curtains
drawn. I clamber into my bunk just as I am, fully dressed, and push the
escape gear to the foot of the bunk without repacking it. Now the potash
cartridge and its pig snout are in my way. Where will it go? Overboard,
preferably! I never want to see this aluminum box again. Where have the
others stowed theirs? Up on edge against the wall. Yes, that works.
Explosions in my dreams. "What's that?" I stammer, pushing aside
the curtain. Another three, four dull, echoing booms.
Someone is sitting at the table. He turns his face toward me. I
blink and recognize the diesel mate Kleinschmidt.
"They're after someone!"
"Fucking bastards!"
"They can't be after us--it's been going on for half an hour!"
"How late is it now?"
"11.30 hours!"
"What's that? What did you say?"
"11.30 hours--right on the nose!"
With a twisting motion Kleinschmidt raises his right arm, so that I
can see his watch.
Then I notice that I have my own watch again.
Chasing someone! But it must be daylight up there. 11.30-- that's
a.m. Can't rely on my feeling for time. I'm completely confused. Surely
no one would try to get through during the day?
Another series of detonations! "Scare bombs perhaps," I say to
Kleinschmidt. "I wish they'd be good enough to stop; it's driving me
crazy!"
I push myself up, roll over the guardrail, and head for the control
room to find out what's happening.
The control-room mate has taken over the job of keeping count of
the depth charges, because the navigator's asleep.
"Thirty-three, thirty-four, thirty-five, thirty-six, thirty-eight."
The last two were simultaneous.
The First Watch Officer is there too. Sitting on the chart chest
listening intently. In a drill-monkey jacket. Where in the world did he
get that? It's not what we're used to seeing on him. His beard is still
sprouting too. The light from the chart table makes deep shadowy hollows
out of his eyes--a death's head. To complete the image, all he'd have to
do is bare his teeth.
"Forty, forty-two, forty-four--that does it!"
"How far off?"
"Way off," says the control-room mate.
"At least fifteen miles," says the First Watch Officer.
"Thank you so much!"
The fact that the Commander is not in the control room makes me
uneasy. And the Chief? Is he in the engine room? Or is he finally asleep?
The two hydroplane operators perch motionless in front of their control
buttons. Indifferent, as though they'd long since gone to sleep.
A whole series of detonations in a single grumbling drone.
"Way off!" I hear the Commander growl behind me. Wearing nothing
but shirt and trousers. His face is twisted in professional disapproval.
Behind him I see the navigator. And now the Chief.
"Shit!" mutters the Chief in every pause between bombs. "Shit--
shit---shit!" Like a defiant child.
Have they by any chance been working over our oil slick? The bombs
could hardly be intended for another boat. After all, it's broad
daylight!
"Coming nearer," says the navigator.
That's all we need! The rudder motor is making much too much noise.
Everything in this boat is too loud.
The Old Man dismisses this with a flick of his hand. "Foolishness!"
Just then the rumbling suddenly stops. You'd think the Old Man's
hand had put an end to it.
"Probably unloading their surplus!" he says bitingly. "Had to get
rid of them! So they're littering."
He disappears again.
I take a look at the chart. Amazing--the navigator has patched the
hole in our course. It wouldn't surprise me if the ship's position, which
was entered at o6.oo, had been derived from astronomical observation. If
I know him, he took a few quick shots at the stars before he left the
bridge.
On the chart, everything looks quite simple. We've certainly
performed more complicated maneuvers before: This is a mere reverse tack.
I see by the Papenberg that we're sixty feet down.
Herrmann's on duty in the sound room. He favors me with a blank,
owlish stare. I almost say "Good morning" into his empty face. But it's
already midday. And I mustn't disturb him. He's supposed to be listening
in all directions at once. His two earphones have to take the place of
four pairs of binoculars; his two eardrums, eight eyes.
What was it the control-room mate said? "Limping home on crutches--
not exactly my line." Back from the Beresina on crutches. And the Lord
smote them with men and with horses, and with chariots. Faith, hope, and
charity, these three. But the greatest of these is hope.
The Commander has closed his curtain. I tiptoe past.
In the Officers' Mess the Second Watch Officer is flat out. But the
Chief isn't in his bunk. If he hasn't slept at all yet, he must be about
ready for the madhouse. Twelve hours ago he was already practically a
dead man. And this is the time his wife is due. A pretty state of
affairs: his wife in a clinic in Flensburg, and the Chief in the Atlantic
surrounded by demolished machinery, sixty feet down and on the verge of
madness.
I'm ready to drop dead of exhaustion again. No strength to drag
myself back to the petty officers' compartment. Half conscious, I
collapse in a corner of the Chief's bunk.
The steward wakes me. Apparently he's been trying for some time. I
knew someone was shaking me, but let myself float back into
unconsciousness time after time. His mouth is close to my face. "Five
minutes to midnight, Herr Leutnant!"
I squeeze my eyelids together as tight as I can, then wrench them
open.
"Yes?"
"Five minutes to midnight, Herr Leutnant!"
"Is there something to eat?"
"_Jawohl!_"
I can hear the Commander next door, talking to the sound man. He's
rasping like a drunk. Now he comes in.
"Well!" is all he has to say, as usual.
Reddened eyes, twitching eyelids, sallow skin, glistening hair,
dark glistening beard: He's obviously put his whole head under a faucet.
Finally he opens his mouth. "What's on the menu?"
"Roulade of beef with red cabbage," the steward replies.
Cookie--he's a fucking genius! I'd been counting on canned sausage
at best, not a Sunday dinner.
"Hm," says the Old Man. He's leaned back and is blinking at the
ceiling.
"Where's the Chief?" I ask.
"With his beloved engines; where else? He fell asleep squatting
right there between the diesels. They stretched him out on a bunk
mattress. He's to stay there for the time being."
Three steaming dishes appear on the table. The Old Man savors the
delicious smells that come wafting toward him,
Three, four dull detonations. Is that bombing never going to stop?
The Commander makes a face. Gnaws at his lower lip. Two explosions
later he says, "These fireworks are getting to be a bore! Anyone would
think it was New Year's Eve already!"
He shuts his eyes and massages his face. It doesn't improve his
color for long.
"And the Second Engineer?"
The Commander yawns. But this one has words to it. ". . . In the
engine room too. Seems there are still some things to be patched up
there."
He yawns again, leans back, and pats his gaping mouth with the back
of his right hand, thereby transforming the yawn into a tremolo.
"He's had a proper training course. Now at least he knows what it's
all about!" He spears a piece of roulade, bares his teeth, and bites on
it cautiously: hot.
"Propeller noise bearing ninety degrees!" calls the sound man.
The Old Man is up at once and beside the sound room.
"Louder or weaker?" he asks impatiently.
"Constant! Turbine engines! Still rather weak--now they're getting
louder."
The loop of the headset arches between their two heads like a
bracket as the two men share the earphones. Not a word.
Slowly I turn to look at our table again. My half of a roulade lies
between a small heap of red cabbage and a small heap of potatoes. All at
once it seems ridiculous.
"Moving away!" That was the sound man.
Groans and the cracking of joints announce that the Old Man is
getting to his feet again.
"They might at least let us eat in peace," he says as he pushes
himself back behind the narrow end of the table.
He's hardly sat down when the sound man announces new noises. "One
hundred seventy degrees!"
"Just when it was getting nice and quiet," says the Commander with
reproach in his voice--and then, "We'll just wait a bit!"
He takes two or three bites. I decide to go on eating too--very
cautiously--in case I make any unnecessary clatter with my knife and
fork.
Here we are, trying to swallow good roulades while the Tommies are
playing the acoustics game. It strikes the Old Man as sheer spitefulness.
"Cold," he says disgustedly, as he bites on the next mouthful. Annoyed,
he stares at his food for a few minutes longer, then pushes the plate
away.
The exploding depth charges plus the closeness of the propeller
noises are making him visibly nervous. Possibly the Tommies really _are_
focusing on our oil slick? Is there any way we can _know_ whether we're
leaving a trail behind us?
A couple of hours more sleep, that's the thing! Bliss! Stretch out,
curl your toes, and then straighten them out again. Given the mess we're
in, that amounts to pure happiness. I shudder at the thought that we'd
have been swimming for hours by now if the Old Man hadn't been so
stubborn. That ice-cold poker player knows what a floating vessel is
worth, even if it's a wreck.
It's 17.30 hours when I wake up. Very odd--we're steering a course
of thirty degrees. So the Old Man must want to bring us close to the
coast again. If we hold to this course we'll run straight into Lisbon.
How long is it since I was called to the bridge one night because
we were abreast of Lisbon?
Close under the coast is presumably the safest place for us. In
case of need, run the scow ashore--that may be what he has in mind.
Possible, yes. But if I know him, he'll do anything to hold out.
We are, after all, fully equipped. Quantities of oil--despite our
losses due to leakage. Full quota of torpedoes and plenty of provisions.
A provisioned boat is not something our Old Man would be likely to
surrender.
For a voyage straight across Biscay, Cape Finesterre would be the
starting point. Is that what he's after?
"Stand by to surface!" The order echoes from mouth to mouth. Since
there's nobody moving in the next compartment, I get up, walk stifflegged into the gangway, open the hatch to the bow compartment, and roar
into the semi-darkness, "Stand by to surface!"
The customary ritual begins. The second watch is on duty. i8.oo.
Only two more hours of watch.
A crowd in the control room. Once again we have to surface blind.
"Tower free!"
"Equalize pressure!"
The hatch springs open. The Commander's the first one up. He
immediately orders diesel power. The boat shudders. Course thirty
degrees.
I go up onto the bridge behind the Second Watch Officer. A quick
look around: We're alone within the circle of the horizon. The nightblack sea contrasts sharply with a trace of brighter sky. Little wind.
"We'll soon have Lisbon abeam," says the Old Man.
"But this time to starboard," I say, and all the while I'm
thinking: if that were the only difference!
The Chief appears for dinner. I hardly dare look at him, he's so
worn.
"They must have had radar," the Old Man says to him.
Radar. All the big ships have it. Those huge maneuverable
mattresses on the mast. The _Bismarck_ caught the _Hood_ with radar,
before the _Hood_ had shown so much as the tip of her mast. And now the
Tommies must have succeeded in shrinking their huge systems the way the
Japanese shrink trees. Dwarf trees, and now dwarf radars, so small the
whole business fits into a cockpit. And you can bet your life we don't
have any defense against it yet.
I'm curious to know when Simone will find out. Her people are very
much on the alert. _Her people?_ I'd give a lot to know whether she
really is committed to the Maquis or not. We should have been back long
ago. No boat in the last year has been out as long as this, even without
the Gibraltar disaster.
Not a word about Gibraltar. Not the slightest reference to it. The
hours we spent on the bottom are taboo.
The seamen are silent too. Gibraltar has left its mark on their
faces. Naked fear is the most common expression. Everyone knows: We're
unable to dive. The boat won't stand more than periscope depth. Many of
the ribs are broken. The boat is as wobbly as a hammock, not much more
than a traveling wreck. Everyone's afraid it's not up to the winter
storms of Biscay. Our only piece of luck is that the Tommies are
convinced they've smashed us. Which means they won't send out a search
party.
The next day I wake up to feel a hand on my arm.
The shock of fear. "What's happened?"
The control-room assistant Turbo catches my horrified expression.
No sound of the diesel, not a hum from the motors. Quiet in the boat.
"What's going on?"
Turbo's still staring at me.
"Man, can't you tell me what's going on?"
"We're lying dead."
Stopped? How can that be? Even while I was asleep, every change in
speed was registering itself in my subconscious. And now the engine has
stopped without my even hearing it?
A blow like a fist on a sandbag, then a sucking smack: waves
striking against the buoyancy tanks. The boat rocks placidly back and
forth.
"You're to come to the bridge."
The control-room mate is a considerate man. He's carved his news
into bite-sized pieces and is waiting until I've swallowed the first
before offering the next. "The Commander's topside--you're to come up
too--fact is, we've stopped a liner."
As though to emphasize what he's saying, he nods, then withdraws
from further questioning by walking backward.
Stopped a liner? The Old Man must have gone mad. What's all this
nonsense about? A new act? Or a rehash of the old days when they captured
enemy ships and sailed them home as booty?
So quiet! The curtain opposite is open, and the one underneath. No
one around. Are they all out stopping ships?
Two men in the control room, thank god. Tilting my head back I ask,
"Permission to come onto the bridge?"
"_Jawohl!_"
A wet wind. Sky full of stars. Chunky figures in the dark: the
Commander, the navigator, the First Watch Officer. A quick glance over
the bulwark: Oh my god--directly over our net guard a gigantic ship.
Bearing ninety, bow left. Brilliantly lit up from stem to stern. A
passenger liner. Easily twelve thousand gross registered tons, if not
more! Just lying there! Dead in the water! A thousand tongues of yellowwhite reflections on the black ocean: shimmering spangles.
"I've been busy with her for an hour now," the Old Man growls
without turning around.
It's icy cold. I shiver. The navigator hands me his binoculars.
After two or three minutes the Old Man speaks again. "We stopped her
exactly fifty-five minutes ago."
He has his glasses to his eyes. The navigator begins a whispered
explanation. "We used our lamp to signal her--" Then the Commander breaks
in: "Signaled that we'd torpedo her if they used their radio. They
probably haven't used it, either. And they were supposed to give us her
name. But it doesn't check. Reina Victoria--something or other Spanish.
The First Watch Officer couldn't find it in the register. Something's
rotten in the State of Denmark!"
"But all those lights!" I say without thinking.
"What better camouflage than to keep all your lights on and claim
to be a neutral?"
The navigator clears his throat. "Funny," he says, between the
hands supporting his binoculars.
"Much too funny for my taste," growls the Commander. "If only we
knew whether the scow's on record. I've asked. Message went out long
ago."
So the Old Man has radioed after all! Damned dangerous. Was it
really necessary?
"Still no answer. Maybe our transmitter is out of order."
This is too much! A signal--in our situation! Just to be sure they
can get a fix on us!
The Old Man seems to have read my thoughts, because he says, "Have
to be certain what I'm doing."
Once more the feeling of unreality, that this huge ship is an
optical illusion, that at any minute there will be a bang--and then sighs
of relief, laughter, end of performance.
"He's known for the last half hour that he'll be torpedoed if he
doesn't send over a boat," says the Old Man.
The First Watch Officer also has his eyes glued to his glasses.
Silence. This is pure madness. This gigantic liner towering over our
bulwark. Playing pirates with our ruined scow! The Old Man's out of his
mind!
"We're covering the wave length he uses. But god knows what all
this is about. First Watch Officer, signal over again in English: If the
boat isn't here in ten minutes, I'll open fire. Ship's time, navigator?"
"03.20 hours!"
"Report to me when it's 03.30."
For the first time I see the radioman Hinrich on the bridge. He's
braced high up over the bulwark, with the heavy signal lamp in his hands,
sending stabs of light darting through the darkness toward the liner.
"Damned impertinence!" the Old Man snorts, when there's no
acknowledgment of the signal from the other side. "That really is. . .
the fucking limit!"
The radioman has to repeat his call three times before a signal
lamp finally shows between the bright portholes of the steamer. The First
Watch Officer whispers each letter along with the radioman: short flash--
long flash--short, long--another eternity before the answer is completed.
The Old Man defiantly refuses to read the letters.
"Well?" he finally snaps at the First Watch Officer.
"He's hurrying the best he can, is what he signaled, Herr Kaleun."
"Hurrying the best he can! What's that supposed to mean? First he
gives us a false name, then this rubbish. Ship's time, navigator?"
"03.25 hours."
"Nerve! Gives us a false name, then just sits there, not doing a
fucking thing. . ."
The Commander shifts from one foot to the other, hands thrust deep
into the side pockets of his leather jacket, head down.
No one ventures a word. Not a sound apart from the splashing of the
waves against the buoyancy tanks till the Old Man cuts loose again,
cursing hoarsely. "Hurrying the best they can--what the hell's that
supposed to mean?"
From below, the Chief joins in. "What's wrong?"
"If there's no boat here in five minutes, I'm going to let them
have it," the Old Man says in a tight voice.
I'm well aware that he's expecting the navigator to agree, but the
navigator remains silent. He raises his glasses and puts them down again,
but that's all. Minutes pass. The Commander turns to him: The navigator
tries to raise his glasses, but too late. He has to express an opinion.
"I--I--no idea, Herr Kaleun. You simply can't tell--"
"_What_ can't you tell?" the Old Man interrupts.
"There's something not quite right," the navigator says haltingly.
"Exactly my opinion!" the Old Man answers. "The delay's
intentional. They're sending for destroyers. Or aircraft."
He sounds as if he's trying to convince himself. The halting voice
of the navigator makes itself heard again. ". . . worth waiting a bit."
After all, we _can't_ play pirates with this ruined tub of ours.
The Old Man can't possibly go on playing the heavy. Thank god the 
cannon's gone. Otherwise he'd be all set to fire away, just to get the
people on the ghost ship moving.
"Flood tube one!"
That ice-cold voice! He's standing diagonally behind me. I can feel
his impatience between my shoulder blades. This is no attack: This is a
shooting gallery. Our opponent is lying still. So are we. Virtually
point-blank range: We're holding our muzzle right up against the target,
so to speak.
Two waves boom dully against the buoyancy tanks, one after the
other. Then silence again. Only panting breath. Is that really the
navigator? Suddenly the Old Man's voice is loud and cutting. "That's it,
navigator: I've had enough! Anything to be seen?"
"No, Herr Kaleun," Kriechbaum replies from under his binoculars,
his tone equally sharp. A few seconds pause, then he adds more calmly,
"But I'm not happy . . ."
"What d'you mean, you're not happy, navigator? Do you see
something--or don't you?"
"No, Herr Kaleun, nothing to be seen." Hesitantly.
"Then why the metaphysics?"
More silence, in which the splashing of the waves suddenly echoes
loudly.
"All right then!" the Commander suddenly shouts, apparently in a
rage, and gives his orders. "Tube one stand by for underwater shot!"
He takes a deep breath and then in a lowered voice--as if giving a
running commentary on some trivial event--he gives the order to fire tube
one.
A perceptible jolt runs through the hull as the torpedo leaves the
boat.
"Tube one discharged!" comes the report from below.
The navigator puts down his binoculars, the First \Vatch Officer
too. We stand rooted, all faces turned toward the glowing chain of
portholes.
Christ, what happens next? It's a gigantic ship, this passenger
liner. And it must be filled to bursting. Any moment now they'll be
blasted sky high or drowned in their cabins. The torpedo can't possibly
miss. The ship's lying still. No need to calculate the angle of fire.
Smooth sea. The torpedo's setfor six feet below the water line, aimed
precisely midships. And the range is ideal.
I stare wide-eyed at the liner, already imagining a massive
explosion: the whole ship rearing up, jagged fragments soaring into the
air, a huge mushroom of smoke, a blaze of white and scarlet.
The air sticks in my throat. How much longer till the blow falls?
The chains of light in the liner begin to dance--I must be straining my
eyes.
Then I become aware that someone's making a report: "Torpedo not
running!"
What? Who was that? The voice came from below--from the sound room.
Not running! But I distinctly felt the jolt of its discharge.
"No wonder," says the navigator, with what sounds like a sigh of
relief. The torpedo isn't running. Which means it's not functioning
properly. The bomb from the plane! It must have wrecked the steering
mechanism . . - the pressure wave, of course--no torpedo could have
withstood it. An omen! And now?
Tube two, tube three, tube four?
"Then we'll just try tube five," I hear the Old Man say,
immediately followed by the order: "Connect stern tube!"
Now he's giving the necessary engine and rudder orders to turn the
boat--calmly, as if practicing maneuvers.
So he doesn't trust the other torpedoes in the bow tubes--but is
counting on the fact that the one in the stern tube may still be
undamaged.
So he won't let go. Won't leave it at that. Won't even heed the
omens. He's waiting for a regular kick in the teeth. The boat slowly
gains momentum and begins to turn. The bright lights of the ship that
were ahead of us just a moment ago move gradually to starboard and then
shift astern. Two or three minutes more and we'll have her right over our
stern: in perfect position for tube five.
"_There they are!_"
I nearly jump out of my skin. The navigator shouts straight into my
right ear.
"Where?" snaps the Commander.
"There--that has to be the boat!" He points with outstretched arm
into the darkness.
My eyes are watering from staring at the night sea. And there--
there actually is a blob--something black, something a shade darker than
the rest of the water.
Soon it's between our stern and the flickering glow--a dark mass
clearly outlined against the twinkling reflections.
"In a cutter! Are they out of their minds?" I hear the Old Man say.
"A cutter. In this sea! And without light!"
I stare incredulously at the dark blob. For one brief instant I
catch a glimpse of six figures.
"Number One and two men stand by on the upper deck! Searchlight to
the bridge!"
From the tower, a confusion of voices.
"Move it!"
Apparently the electric cable has become tangled up in something,
but the navigator reaches down and manages to get hold of the hand
searchlight.
I think I can hear the splashing of oars.
Suddenly the bow of the cutter appears in the beam of the
searchlight, high out of the water, unreal, projected on a movie screen;
then it disappears again between the waves. Only the head of the man in
the stern is visible; with his forearm he's shielding his eyes from the
dazzling glare.
"Careful, Number One! Keep her well clear!" roars the Old Man.
"Christ almighty!" rings in my ear. I give another tremendous
start. This time it's the Chief. I hadn't noticed him come on the bridge.
The cutter is up again. I make out six men plus the helmsman:
shapeless creatures rowing furiously.
Number One thrusts out a boat hook like a lance.
Shouting, confusion of voices. Number One curses, and sends his men
scurrying up and down on the upper deck with fenders. Now it sounds as
though an oar has splintered. The helmsman on the cutter waves wildly
with his free hand. Most of the shouting seems to be coming from him.
"Look out!" roars Number One. And again: "Look out! Goddammit, you
crazy pigs . . ."
The Commander hasn't budged an inch. And he doesn't say a word.
"Searchlight to the upper deck! Don't blind them!" shouts Number
One.
The cutter is carried away again; in a moment there are fifteen or
twenty feet of open water between it and our upper deck. Two men have
stood up, the helmsman and someone else I hadn't seen before; so there
are eight of them.
Meanwhile Number One has been joined by some more of the crew. As
the cutter swept toward us again, the two men succeed in jumping onto our
upper deck, one after the other. The first one stumbles, almost falls,
but is caught just in time by the bosun. The second jumps short and lands
on his knees, but before he can fall back one of our men has grabbed him
by the back of the neck like a rabbit. The first stumbles into the hole
that the bomb tore in our upper deck; the second trips and falls against
the gun mount. There's an audible thump.
"That'll put a nice gash in his face," someone behind me says. The
bosun curses.
The two shapeless figures clamber stiffly up the iron ladder on the
outside of the tower. Dear god, they're wearing old-fashioned kapok life
jackets. No wonder they can hardly move.
"_Buenos noches!_" I hear.
"What was that the gentlemen just said?" the Chief asks.
The bridge is suddenly jammed. An incomprehensible torrent of talk.
The smaller of the two men is gesturing like an epileptic marionette.
Sou'westers, pulled low, almost cover their faces. Their kapok life
jackets have worked up so high during their climb that the arms of the
second man--the one who's not motioning--stick out like two long handles.
"Take it easy gentlemen, and _downstairs please!_" says the Old Man
in English, making quieting gestures as he points below.
"Spaniards," says the navigator.
They're small men, but they're wearing so much bulky clothing that
they can hardly get through the hatch.
In the semi-darkness of the control room I finally get a look at
them. One, the Captain, apparently is stout, with a short black beard
that looks glued to his face. The other is a little taller and has a dark
complexion. Both peer about as though searching for some means of escape.
Now I notice that the Captain is bleeding from a flesh wound over his
eye. Like a wounded boxer. The blood's running in streams down his cheek.
"Boy, they're at the end of their rope!" I hear the control-room
mate Isenberg say.
He's right. I've never seen such fear.
Then I realize what a terrifying spectacle we must present:
glittering eyes, sunken cheeks, unkempt beards, a barbarian horde loose
in a world of machines. And we must stink like the plague. Most of us
still have on the same tattered underwear we were wearing when we put to
sea. And these two have come from a world of rosewood saloons and
carpeted passageways: I bet there are even crystal chandeliers on the
ceilings. Everything as fancy as the Weser.
Did we scare them up from the dinner table? Can't have. It's the
middle of the night.
"They're acting as if we were about to butcher them," Isenberg
murmurs.
The Old Man stares open-mouthed at the gesticulating Spanish
Captain as if he's a visitor from outer space. Why doesn't he say
something? We all stand round the two jumping jacks and stare: No one 
says a word. The fat Spaniard flails his arms and emits torrents of
incomprehensible syllables.
Suddenly I'm wild with rage. I could jump at his throat, choke off
his stream of gibberish, knee him in the balls. I no longer recognize
myself: "You goddamned sonovabitch," I hear myself snarl, "getting us
into this mess!"
The Old Man's flabbergasted.
"You can't wipe your ass on us like this!"
The Spaniard just stares at me, blank horror in his face. I can't
articulate what has enraged me: but I know what it is. Turning us into
executioners--not answering our signals; keeping the Old Man waiting for
hours; arriving in this childish cutter instead of a motor launch;
without running lights; simply wandering about.
The stream of Spanish has ceased abruptly. His eyes jerk around.
Suddenly he stammers, "_Gutte Mann, Gutte Mann_." He doesn't know whom to
make this grotesque appeal to, so he turns on his heels in his life
jacket, awkward as a bear, still clutching the oilskin envelope with his
ship's papers under his arm. Then he seizes them in his right hand and
performs a kind of hands-up.
The Old Man screws up his face and reaches silently for the
envelope. The Spaniard screeches in protest, but the Old Man interrupts
him coldly. "Your ship's name?" He asks in English.
"_Reina Victoria--Reina Victoria--Reina Victoria!_"
Suddenly he's all eagerness to oblige; he bows and immediately
rises on tiptoe to point out this name in the ship's papers, which the
Old Man has pulled out of the envelope.
The First Watch Officer observes the scene expressionlessly, but
he's beginning to look sick.
Suddenly, there's quiet. After a while the Old Man raises his eyes
from the papers and looks at the First Watch Officer. "Tell this
gentleman that his ship does not exist. After all, you speak Spanish."
The First Watch Officer comes out of his trance. He turns brightred
and begins to stammer out Spanish from behind the foreign Captain's back.
The latter opens his eyes wide in amazement and snaps his head from side
to side, trying to catch the First Watch Officer's eye, but no amount of
head-turning can accomplish this-- his life jacket's sitting much too
high on him; he has to pivot his whole body. In so doing he ends up with
his back to me. And it's a shock. Small stenciled letters on the under
edge of his life jacket: _South Carolina_. I'm suddenly triumphant. Now
we've got you! The Old Man was right. An American, disguised as a
Spaniard!
I poke the Old Man and trace the lettering on the edge of the life
jacket. "Interesting, this: look--_South Carolina!_"
The Spaniard whirls around as though bitten by a tarantula and
pours out a torrent of words.
Got you, you bastard. Cut the Spanish jabber. You can talk English,
you son of a bitch.
The Old Man stares nonpiussed at the stuttering little man, then
orders the First Watch Officer to tell us what the Spaniard is gabbling
about.
"_South Carolina_--the ship--was actually named--_South Carolina_,"
stammers the First Watch Officer. The Spaniard is hanging on his words
and nodding like a circus clown. "Now, however, it is _Reina Victoria_.
It was--five years ago--bought from the Americans."
The Old Man and the Spaniard stare at each other, and look ready to
spring at each other's throats. It's so quiet von can hear every drip of
condensation as it falls.
"He's right," the navigator announces from the table. "Fourteen
thousand gross tons." He's holding the register of ships.
The Old Man looks from the Spaniard to the navigator, and back
again.
"Say that again," he says finally in a voice that cuts like a whip.
"The boat is entered in the supplement, Herr Kaleun." And when the
Old Man still doesn't react, he adds in an undertone, "The Herr
Oberleutnant didn't consult the supplement."
The Old Man clenches his fists and stares at the First Watch
Officer. He's fighting a monumental battle for self-control. Finally he
barks: "I--demand--an--explanation!"
The First Watch Officer turns uncertainly toward the navigator and
reaches for the register. A couple of staggering steps toward the chart
table, and he comes to a stop. The way he's propping himself up, you'd
think he'd been wounded.
The Old Man is shaking as if in sudden horror. Before the First
Watch Officer can say anything he turns back to the Spaniard, a twisted
grin on his face. The Spanish Captain senses the change at once and
becomes wildly voluble again. "_South Carolina_ American ship--now _Reina
Victoria_ Spanish ship." Five, six times. Gradually the fear fades from
his face.
"Navigator, take a look at these papers!" the Commander orders. But
before he can begin to leaf through them, we get our briefing from the
Spanish Captain. "_Dos mil pasaieros--por America del Sud--Buenos
Aires!_"
The Old Man breathes in very loudly through his nose, then blows
out hard through slack lips. His whole body sags. And now he slaps the
Spaniard on the shoulder. The eyes of the Second Spaniard--he must be the
First Officer--light up like candles on a Christmas tree.
The Commander is a changed man. He seems to have forgotten the
First Watch Officer completely. A bottle of Cognac and three glasses
appear as if by magic. "Never say no to an honest drop." The Spaniard
considers this some kind of toast and won't be outdone. More crazy
gibberish and cries of "_Eilitler! Eilitler! Eilitler!_"
The First Watch Officer is as white as a sheet. He stammers out a
rough translation of the ]atest outburst. "Their Captain says--he thought
we were--we were an English patrol boat. That's why-- that's the reason
that he--allowed himself so much time. It was only when--he realized we
weren't British--that things went crazy. And then the first boat they
sent--was, so he says, upset."
The Spaniard nods like a rocking horse and adds, "_Sí, sí_," again
and again. "_Sí, sí, sí!_"
". . . upset and drifted away. He apologizes."
"Apologizes is good!" says the Old Man. "He ought to be on his
knees thanking us and the Tommy who ruined our first fish. And wouldn't
you like to tell him that you almost had him standing around in a white
nightgown by now? Him and his friend and his two thousand passengers as
well! That _you_ almost had the lot of them on your conscience. Why don't
you tell him that?"
The First Watch Officer's lower jaw goes slack. He's finished; he
can't even control his muscles any more.
When the Spaniards are back in the cutter, the Captain starts
shouting offers of phonograph records and fruit: half an hour, and it'll
all be here--very up to date! Spanish music! Flamenco! Marvelous fresh
fruit, lots of it, for the whole crew!
"Push off, you old asshole!" roars one of the men on the upper
deck, and shoves the Spanish cutter away from the buoyancy tank. Number
One helps with the boat hook. The oars splash into the water. Fragments
of Spanish words, and then something that sounds like "_Wiedersehen_."
"Are you out of your mind?" roars the bosun. The Spaniards soon
become a dark blob again.
"They must be! Not even carrying lights," the navigator scolds
after them. "They were within sixty feet of us before we saw them.
Completely mad!"
We all stare after them, but already there's no trace of the
cutter: The night sea has swallowed it up.
The Old Man takes his time giving engine-room orders.
He finds the First Watch Officer in the control room.
"Do you have any idea--do you even have the brains to realize what
you almost managed to commit? What _I_ would have committed because my
prize specimen of a First Watch Officer isn't even competent to do
something as simple as consulting the register properly? I'll tell you
something--you ought to be court-martialed!"
There's nothing left for the First Watch Officer to do but to shoot
himself. But the only pistol on board is in possession of the Commander.
Securely locked up.
Uproar in the petty officers' quarters: "The navigator knew
something was screwy right from the start!"--"The First Watch Officer
really got his balls chewed off!"--"We were nearly up the creek!"--
"Trust the Old Man--jump in with both feet, _then_ have second thoughts.
But he really excelled himself this time."--"Christ, they don't know how
lucky they were!"--"Damn great ship like that and no launch."--"Boy, what
a horse's ass!" The last is a reference to the First Watch Officer.
Hours later the Old Man recapitulates. "Everything suddenly went
wrong at once. It was within a hair's breadth of being a second _Laconia_
incident. If the torpedo's steering hadn't been ruined . . ."
Silence. Several minutes later, still chewing on his pipestem, he
says: "It really shows you--life or death--sheer chance--oh, bullshit!"
There's no doubt that the Old Man's feeling very uncomfortable about the
whole thing, and he's trying to justify himself. "But the whole thing was
so obvious--they _did_ keep delaying--and we gave them more than enough
time. They were behaving like maniacs!"
"Yes, but only because they were assuming they'd been stopped by a
_British_ patrol boat. We _did_ hail them in English. Apparently they
never even considered the possibility that we might be a German
submarine."
"Well, that's what you get for showing off in foreign languages!"
"They must have been scared shitless when they recognized us!"
"Tsch!" says the Old Man. "That's the way things go. One thing
leads to another and . . ."
He's silent for a good five minutes. They he says, "It's also a
terrible disadvantage that we've no way of measuring the power of our
transmitter. Perhaps our inquiry about them never even went out. After 
all, the antenna was sheared off, and all sorts of other equipment was
ruined. A radio on the blink and an incompetent for a First Watch
Officer--what more could you ask for?"
Quite apart from the state of our nerves, I add silently. It was
the navigator who was right all along. Always rational, always cool,
never flustered. He refused to be seduced by the Old Man's opinions when
he disagreed with them.
The conciliatory gurgling of the Old Man's pipe is driving me out
of my mind. "The whole thing would have caused the most god almighty
stink!" I burst out, "and we'd have been right in the middle of it--"
"No, we wouldn't," the Old Man interrupts harshly.
I can't make head or tail of this. So I wait. There's obviously
more to come. But the interval drags on and on, so finally I say: "I
don't understand."
"Really? It's perfectly simple: We'd have had to wipe the slate
clean. Typical case . . ."
He breaks off, then says in an undertone, "There would have been no
survivors!"
What's he saying?
"It would have been the typical situation that you never find in
the rules. In cases like this you're completely on your own. All the Navy
does is tell you you have complete discretion, That you should use your
own judgment."
The cold pipe in his right hand draws circles in the air. He's
straining for words. "They didn't use their radio. Of course, they know
that we can always monitor that, assuming things are normal. Suppose the
torpedo's gyroscopic apparatus had been in order and had blown up its
target, then the liner would have 'hit a mine.' Sunk so fast there
wouldn't even have been time for a radio signal. In any case, a German Uboat couldn't let itself be seen as having anything to do with it. In
situations like this there's no help for it. You have to wipe the slate
whether you want to or not! You can't do these things by half-measures."
He moves off heavily in the direction of the forward hatch.
The full implications of his gruesome use of the cliché begin to
sink in, and I shiver. Instantly I'm assailed by images of lifeboats
riddled by machine-gun fire, arms thrown up, waves reddened by streams of
blood, faces filled with incredulous horror. I remember scraps of stories
that have made my blood run cold. Half-heard babble in the Bar Royal.
Only dead men tell no tales. Why did _they_ get it? Why not _us?_ They
get us by the short hairs, too.
My teeth begin to chatter uncontrollably. What next? What else must
happen before we're finally wiped out? A shuddering sob rises from
somewhere deep inside me. I clench my fists and grit my teeth as hard as
I can, choking it back until the whole lower half of my face is a single
knot of pain. And just at that point the Chief turns up.
"Well, well, what's the matter now?" he asks, concern in his voice.
"Nothing," I manage to say. "Nothing--quite all right!"
He hands me a glass of apple juice. I seize it with both hands,
take a great gulp, then say, "Lie down--I'd just like to lie down for a
while."
In the bow compartment Dufte is almost beaten up when he says,
"Biscay--let's hope we get through all right!" This is no time to tempt 
fate or jog the table that's supporting our house of cards. Who knows
what else can collapse in this beat-up scow? The Old Man must have his
reasons for laying a course so close to the coast. The order "Prepare
safety gear" still haunts the air.
The thing we fear most is enemy flyers. If a plane spots us now,
we're finished. Everyone knows that. Crash dives are out of the question.
Times have changed: Now we actually pray for bad weather--but only
moderately bad. Spare us the hurricane.
Tomorrow, everything will look even worse. At that point the coast
will recede, and the voyage through Biscay begin. How can we cover this
stretch without being spotted from the air? Biscay is under the tightest
surveillance of all. And if the Old Man was right? If the British Air
Force now have some kind of new equipment that makes us visible even on
the darkest night?
What day is it today anyway? Just "today"; it's meaningless. When
we're gliding along underwater, it's day. When we're surfaced and running
on the diesel, it's night. Right now it's ten o'clock and we're
underwater. So it must be ten a.m.
But what day of the week is it? My brain labors to work it out. I
feel drugged. Finally a word takes shape: calendar. I wonder what day
it's showing today. I can't get comfortable on this goddam chest I'm
sitting on, so I might as well head for the Officers' Mess. That's where
the calendar is too.
Wobbly as hell on my feet. Like walking on stilts. Well, get going!
Pull yourself together.
The sound man is staring blankly as usual. Looks like a blowfish
behind glass in an aquarium.
In the Officers' Mess I use my left hand to support myself on the
table. Quite comfortable, standing this way.
What kind of date is that on the calendar? Ninth of December? We're
way behind the times. Down with the ninth of December! I'll keep the
sheet for my private notebook. Memorable. A kind of Bastille Day! The
record from tile barograph and the page from the calendar: evocative
souvenirs, and as thrills go, cheap at the price. Eleventh of December.
Down with that too. The thirteenth was Explosion Day. Keep that one too.
Nineteenth of December. We were lying on tile bottom. Twentieth--the
same. Twenty-first, twenty-second. All those days! And now it's the
twenty-third. Which is today. Which makes it Tuesday.
Then I hear someone say, "Christmas Eve tomorrow!" Some Christmas
present! I gulp. Sentimentality? The usual Christmas emotions? The
Festival of Love--at sea, on a bombed-out scow. It's certainly different!
We are, of course, superbly equipped for the Festival of Love, thanks to
the inimitable foresight of the Navy-- there's the folding Christmas tree
that came on board with the rest of the provisions. How will the Old Man
handle it? He's certainly got more important things to worry about.
He's considering laying a course for La Rochelle. We could possibly
head up the Gironde to Bordeaux, but although Bordeaux lies farther
south, it's really no nearer. From our present position to La Rochelle is
still about four hundred miles--four hundred miles straight across the
Bay of Biscay: that means at least another thirty-five hours minimum. But
since we have to submerge during the day, the calculation looks worse
than that. We'll probably need as much as forty-eight hours. That's a
long time, especially since we don't know what weather conditions we'll 
have to deal with in the next few days, or whether the diesel will hold
out.
The Old Man and the navigator have still further worries. "There's
the question of how we can get in--no notion--very narrow entrance--
certain to be all kinds of barriers--coastal shelf very shallow-- danger
of mines."
Subdued voices everywhere. Everyone seems to be on tiptoe, as
though the first loud noise would attract the enemy's attention.
I notice that everyone who comes through the control room tries to
get a look at the chart, but no one dares ask how many miles it is to
base; no one is willing to admit how shaky he is. At the same time they
all have the same thought: Bay of Biscay, naval graveyard. The worst
storms, the most intensive aerial surveillance.
When the navigator is back at his table I try the direct approach.
"How many hours yet?" "Tsch!" is all I get by way of an immediate answer.
Presently he'll start spinning conditional sentences that all begin with
"if," I think to myself. But he's more diplomatic than that. "What can
one say?"
I watch him out of the corner of my eye until he finally gets going
again. "I calculate forty-six hours at least. Altogether, that is--not
just counting the time at cruising speed."
In the bow compartment I discover that Ario was being tormented by
worries of his own while the boat was on the bottom. Ario has a
collection of contraceptives in his seabag. Plus some very expensive
special items. He enumerates them: "Ones with rubber knobs, fancy
ticklers, even a 'hedgehog' or two This was the embarrassment of riches
that had been weighing on his mind the whole time. "Well, how would it
look if stuff like that turned up among my things? And, besides, they'd
be wasted on my next of kin . . . I can tell you one thing--before the
next patrol, I'm going to blow up every single condom and pop the lot."
"You needn't have worried; the flotilla sees to it that they
disappear. All our stuff is carefully sifted," Bockstiegel explains.
"Filthy photos and rubbers, everything that might not amuse the widows
and mourning relatives. I saw it done once; the paymaster has a whole
team of specialists. Before your gear's turned over, it's as clean as a
whistle. You can rely on that!"
For the bridge johnny, whose mind runs along economical lines,
there are still open questions. "So what does the paymaster do with all
those condoms? After all, they're private property, aren't they?"
"He puts them on a list, meathead. What else would he do? And
someone makes two copies. And then they're all cross-referenced."
"Trust the Navy!" says Schwalle.
The Old Man spends his time commuting from the engine room to the
bow compartment and back to the control room, always followed by the
Chief, trying to form a realistic picture of the boat's condition, though
he certainly won't be able to make an accurate assessment of everything
that's out of order. The ribs, for instance, can't be examined because of
the built-in installations.
"This boat is ready for the ashcan!" I hear him say as he passes.
The navigator reports that we're at the latitude of Cape Ortegal.
So the crossing of Biscay is underway.
The Old Man includes the First Watch Officer in the consultation,
perhaps out of some impulse of sympathy, so that the man won't feel
completely annihilated. A precise sailing program is laid out, but the
factors in the calculation must remain constant if the plan is to
succeed. The prime requirement is that the diesel hold out.
The Old Man slumps on the sofa in the Officers' Mess; he starts to
speak: "The Blessed Feast of Our Lord. . ." then falls silent. I can see
he's fidgeting--it's not difficult to guess why he's troubled.
He clears his throat, trying to lure me into saying something. But
what am I supposed to say? That nobody's exactly in the mood for a
floating Christmas party?
"Oh, screw the whole thing!" he bursts out, while I'm still
searching for words. "We'll simply postpone the festivities. Christmas
Eve for us is when we have solid ground under our feet again. Or do you
attribute some importance to this humbug? I suppose you'll be wanting to
read aloud the Gospel according to Saint Luke?"
"No," is all I can say. Nothing witty occurs to me.
"Well then!" says the Old Man in relief. "We'll simply behave as
though it isn't time yet."
Christmas. Since I turned fourteen something always went wrong. Sad
Christmases, melodramatic Christmases, overdoses of emotional nonsense.
Wailing and police in the house. And then the drunken Christmases . . .
The Old Man's right. What is all this wallowing in sentimentality?
Just let the day run its normal course. A normal day, Christ! Better not
throw days around like that. Better stick to thinking in terms of hours.
Don't call down a jinx. No celebrations. Out of the question.
The Old Man is obviously feeling better. One problem less. I'm
simply curious as to how he's going to communicate his postponement of
festivities to the crew. Then I get my answer. "Tell the petty officers--
it'll get around!"
Apparently the diesel isn't functioning as well as it seemed to be
at first. There are bugs in it that are worrying the Chief. Nothing
really ominous, just disturbing. For the next few hours he doesn't leave
the engine room.
The men know that we're no longer close to shore, and the boat has
become even quieter. Nerves show in fits of trembling at the most
harmless noises. The Chief's the worst. Even at the best of times he
reacts to the tiniest sound from the engines--sounds that no one else
even registers--with the sensitivity of an exceptionally greedy dog
hearing the faint rustling of a biscuit package. But this time he scared
even me. As we were sitting side by side in the Officers' Mess, he leaped
up so suddenly that I went cold; he listened for a fraction of a second
with staring eyes, then dashed into the control room. Fiendish hubbub
instantly broke out. The Chief's voice was cracking with rage. "Have you
gone mad--damn and goddammit--since when--something like this--just take
it away--get moving!"
He collapses in his corner again, panting. I don't dare ask him
what was going on. Ten minutes later I make some inquiries of the
control-room mate as offhandedly as possible.
The Bible Scholar had been working on the knives with polishing
sand. This produced an odd gritty sound, and the Chief had been unable to
identify it.
December twenty-fourth. Still afloat. We've covered a considerable
stretch. As for the weather, we've had incredible good luck: Christmas
weather. The December storms in Biscay are usually terrifying. But the
most we've had have been winds of four to five, and sea three. The sea
generally does remain one point below the wind. It couldn't have been
better. We're almost halfway across, the diesel has held out, and we've
had no pursuit group on our heels. That in itself is enough to provoke a
small show of optimism.
But no! Everyone slouches about looking miserable. Even the Old Man
is monosyllabic. This rubs off on the crew. He may simply be sticking to
his maxim: "No reception before the church service." But unless he cheers
them up, the crew quickly lapses into black pessimism. A bunch of
depressives. I'll have to take a look in the bow compartment again.
Perhaps it's better there.
The bow compartment looks appalling: There's more confusion than
ever. Number One probably hasn't dared give the order to clean ship. The
red-shaded lamps have disappeared. No further hint of whorehouse
atmosphere. Apathetic, prostrate, the off-duty watch lies slumped on the
floor plates, grown-up children with false beards. They hardly speak to
one another. General surrender and fatalism seem to have taken hold.
A few hours later the whole boat has been cleaned up spick and
span. The Commander put a rocket under Number One. Christmas housecleaning.
"Can't let sloppiness take over!" he mutters to me.
A wise decision: Just stick to the ship's routine--no fuss, keep
the tear ducts dry, distract the men from thoughts of home. I dread to
think what total surrender to emotion might produce.
"La Spezia--would have fitted in perfectly," says the Old Man.
Dear god, is he off on Christmas again?
Memories of the orgies of food and drink laid on for the flotilla
at the Hotel Majestic: long tables with white cloths, pine twigs instead
of green fir for decoration. Everyone had a "fancy platter"-- and a
stamped-out star-shaped cardboard plate with spice cookies, Russian
bread, pralines, a chocolate Saint Nicholas. Christmas carols roared out
at full volume. Then the address by the Flotilla Chief--the enduring
union of our beating hearts with those of our loved ones at home, the
solicitous Führer, the old German Night of Dedication, the Great German
Reich, and our splendid _Führer über alles!_ And then, standing: "_Sieg
Heil--Heil--Heil!_" Drunkenness and the descent into maudlin
sentimentality, the blabbering and slobbering, the katzenjammer, the
howling misery.
It's settled: We must try to put in at the nearest reachable base.
Which means La Rochelle, not Saint Nazaire and home.
We're twenty-four hours away. The Old Man sticks rigidly to normal
routine: forty-eight hours before entry into port, whorehouse regulations 
must be read aloud. This should have been done long ago. It's really the
First Watch Officer's job, but the Old Man has relieved him--a kind of
proof of grace, since this text is really something. It now devolves upon
the Second Watch Officer to broadcast it to the crew over the ship's
loudspeaker. Thus, instead of the Gospel according to Saint Luke, the
whorehouse ordinance. The Second Watch Officer does it well. His tone of
voice has the requisite seriousness for the reading of a flotilla order,
while leaving no one in the slightest doubt that he considers the whole
thing a piece of sublime lunacy.
The control-room mate is painting victory pennants. He has already
finished one with the number eight thousand on it: That's for the first
big scow in the convoy.
The First Watch Officer is sitting beside the Chief in the mess,
doing paperwork: assignments for the shipyard, calculation of oil
consumption, a report on the torpedoes fired. It wouldn't surprise me if
he started pecking away at the typewriter again.
Almost hourly I sneak a look at the chart, and each time I itch to
take a pencil and secretly extend the line that's inching toward La
Rochelle.
Every mile we put behind us means that much less tension and fear.
Scraps of conversation echo through the half-open hatch to the bow
compartment. The men's spirits seem to be rising again. I even hear
someone in the next compartment ask who's going to be making out the
leave permits. Hard to believe: We still have a whole night ahead of us,
we're a long way from being able to relax in safety, and someone is
getting excited about his leave permit.
Nothing I hear in the bow compartment would surprise me any more.
"What kind of cathouses do they have in La Rochelle?"
The E-mate Pilgrim was apparently stationed there once.
"How would I know?" is all he says.
"Shit! It really is impossible to ask you a sensible question!"
Thank god--not a trace of Christmas spirit!
Around 01.00 I climb onto the bridge.
"Roughly another two and a half hours to the escort meeting point,"
the navigator reports to the Old Man.
Escort meeting point? Are we as close as that?
"Which means we'll be there nice and early," says the Old Man.
"We'll tuck ourselves in for the time being and have a look at the
traffic."
"_Jawohl_, Herr Kaleun," is all the navigator has to say.
"Well?" The Old Man turns to me. "No great hurry, I guess--or are
you beginning to fidget?"
I can only sigh. What am I supposed to say?
The night air is silky. Am I simply imagining things, or does it
smell of land--that delicate scent of damp foliage?
Perhaps we'll soon see a light from the coast. On second thought,
no! La Rochelle, after all, isn't Lisbon. There's a blackout here. All
along the French coast, the lighthouses were turned off long ago.
"Another hour's sleep?"
"Wouldn't hurt . . ."
I ask the navigator to rout me out when he's relieved and go below
shortly after the Old Man.
"Sea's about two--hardly any wind," the navigator says as he wakes
me, shaking me by the arm.
Once again I beat the Commander to the bridge.
I squint ahead. The horizon is clear, and the east is brightening
already. The First Watch Officer is standing forward on the port side.
"To the Commander: Dawn's breaking!" The Commander comes onto the bridge
and silently checks in all directions.
"Well, it'll probably be all right for a little while longer," he
says finally. But it doesn't take me long to sense how uneasy he is.
Again and again he lifts his head to glance anxiously at the sky. In the
east, a thread of pale yellow lies over the horizon. The darkness is
thinning quickly. Another ten minutes and he says, "We must be just about
there."
The sea is calm. We might as well be on a pond. The sounding gear
is at work. Continuous reports from below. "One hundred feet, ninety feet
It reaches the seventy-foot mark and stays there.
"Excellent!" says the Old Man. "Just what we need. All right,
navigator, that'll do for now! We'll just tuck ourselves in for the time
being. It's getting lighter all the time."
"Stand by to dive!" One more survey of the dark silky sea, then we
climb down slowly, taking our time.
"Chief, just try to set us down nice and gently. Shouldn't be too
hard here."
The bump when the boat touches bottom is no greater than that of an
airplane touching the runway.
"Good," says the Old Man. "Now we'll let the dear Lord take over!"
"And his good Wife, the dear old white-haired lady . . . " That was
the Chief. So he's found his voice again.
"_Tiens, tiens!_" The Old Man obviously feels he's back in France
already. I must ask the navigator whether we're already on good French
sandy bottom or whether the seabed here is still international.
For some time my subconscious has been registering an odd bumping
and scraping noise. Now there's a dull bang, like a fist hitting a wooden
door, immediately followed by a second and third. They echo through the
boat, the last almost drowned out by a shrill whistling before the
bumping and scraping begin again.
"Hard to believe," says the Old Man. "That's quite some current."
"And the bottom isn't exactly all it's cracked up to be." The
Chief.
So the bumping is being caused by rocks. We're not lying fast:
We're being dragged over the bottom.
"Flood the tanks, Chief."
"_Jawohl_, Herr Kaleun!"
I hear water flowing into our regulator tanks: we're anchoring
ourselves.
"Good, now let's hope our direction checks!"
Silence in the boat. Only the _ping-ping_ of condensation. The
offduty watch have long since stretched themselves out on their bunks. As
soon as it's really light, the Old Man will take us up to periscope
depth--forty-five feet. He's not telling us what he'll do next. 
Approaching the coast without a boom-breaker and an escort will be a
ticklish business. Impossible by day and extremely difficult by night.
Just as I lift my right leg to clamber through the after hatch,
there's another bump.
"Goddammit to hell," mutters the Old Man. "We can't be lying
parallel to the current. We'll have to try to reposition her."
With half an ear, I hear the blowing. Then another bump that echoes
through the whole boat. Then an order first for the motors, then the
hydroplane.
Hinrich is at the sound gear. His voice seems to come from a great
distance. "Engine noises bearing three hundred degrees. Growing louder!"
The Old Man raises his eyebrows theatrically. He's standing in the
middle of the control room, listening; the Chief is half concealed behind
him. I don't dare make a move.
The Old Man swallows. I can see his Adam's apple jerking up and
down.
"Piston engines!" the sound man reports.
The Old Man squats down in the gangway beside the sound room and
puts on the headset. His rounded back is toward us. The sound man sticks
his head out.
A mutter from the Old Man: "If that's not a submarine diesel I'll
eat my hat."
He gives the headset back to the sound man, who listens for a
couple of minutes, while the Old Man remains beside him. "Well, Hinrich?"
"Submarine diesels for sure!"
"German or English--that's the question. Get moving, First Watch
Officer, ready with the recognition pistol. We'll surface and you fire at
once. What's the bearing now?"
"Bearing remains two hundred seventy degrees."
"Stand by anti-aircraft guns! First Watch Officer, on the bridge
immediately after me!" Instantly the control room is filled with turmoil.
Someone opens the munitions locker. We're going to put on a fireworks
display right outside our own front door? And throw in the machine guns
just for good measure?
The Old Man already has his hand on a rung of the ladder. "All
clear?"
"_Jawohl_, Herr Kaleun!"
"Surface!"
"Blow the tanks!"
I'm standing directly under the hatch when the recognition pistol
goes off above me. Men are still climbing, so I only catch an occasional
glimpse, between a thigh and the rim of the hatch, of the red and white
magnesium flares. Pretty Christmas stars. Very appropriate. I wait,
holding my breath.
"Fine!" That's the Old Man. "Signal returned. Take her closer,
First Watch Officer. Let's have a look at our colleague."
"Incredible!" the Chief says behind me.
"Permission to come on the bridge?" I ask.
"Come ahead!"
It takes me a while to spot the other boat on the dark water. She's
head on; you could mistake her for a floating barrel.
"Quick! Up with the signal light--move it! Now Zeitler, introduce
us with all the proper courtesies!"
Zeitler directs the signal lamp at the other boat and taps away at
his message.
From the other boat a light flashes out: message acknowledged. Then
I hear our signal lamp again and the navigator reads off what's coming
from over there: "UXW Oberleutnant Bremer."
"That's fantastic!" says the Old Man. "Someone has to be expecting
them. All we need to do is follow them in!"
The navigator beams. A load off his mind: He's the one who would've
had to figure out how to pilot us into La Rochelle.
"Now all we have to do is wait for their escort. Just ask them what
time it's supposed to turn up."
The bosun's mate presses the key of the signal lamp; the answer
comes in a matter of seconds. They must have a first-rate signal man.
"o8.oo!"
"Now signal: 'We'll join you!' That'll give them a riddle to solve:
How come _we're_ turning up as unexpected guests? They must be wondering
why we're putting in at another flotilla's home port--and today of all
days."
The Old Man appears to have no intention of enlightening them.
During the exchange of signals we've moved closer together-- within
hailing distance. A loudspeaker booms: "What happened to your cannon?"
We gape at each other. The Old Man hesitates. Even I take a while
to realize that the others can see us just as clearly as we can them, and
that something has altered our silhouette.
"Damnfool question!" snarls the navigator.
But the Old Man puts the megaphone to his mouth and shouts, "I'll
give you three guesses!"--then turns to the navigator and says in a
normal voice: "He'd do better to make sure his own anti-aircraft guns are
ready. It looks damned nasty to me around here!"
The navigator takes this as a direct injunction to shout at the
bridge lookouts. "Keep your eyes peeled, men, for god's sake!"
Suddenly a violent, muffled explosion runs through the boat. I feel
it as a blow to the back of my knees. Battery? Motors? Something gone
wrong with the diesel? Hell, what was it?
The Old Man shouts down through the hatch. "Report! I want a
report!"
Nothing from below. Questioning glances between the Old Man and the
navigator. The Old Man raises his voice to a roar. "Report! Report at
once!"
The Chief's face appears in the hatchway. "Nothing--nothing to
report, Herr Kaleun!"
The Commander stares. Have we all gone crazy? There's just been an
explosion--and a big one at that!
Then the signal lamp flashes out from the other boat. Three mouths
spell out the message simultaneously: H-a-v-e-s-t-r-u-c-k-m-i-n-e.
"Move! Let's go closer!"
Mine, mine, mine. So we're dawdling over a minefield. They never
come singly.
I focus my binoculars on the other boat. Nothing noticeable. She's
simply lying a little stern heavy, as if badly trimmed. I had always
pictured a mine casualty as looking quite different.
Our bow swings slowly round. The other boat is signaling again.
"Read it out!" the Commander orders.
It's Zeitler who responds: H-i-t-i-n-s-t-e-r-n-m-a-k-i-n-g-w-a-t-er- f-a-s-t-u-n-a-b-l-e-t-o-d-i-v-e.
"One of those damned magnetic mines," says the Old Man. "Probably
dropped by an aerial night patrol."
"And certainly not the only one the navigator says calmly.
"We can't change that, navigator. We _have_ to stay on the surface
and provide anti-aircraft protection."
And drift slowly through the minefield.
The navigator has nothing to say. His binoculars are trained on the
other boat and he betrays not the slightest emotion.
"Just shout across, 'Will stay on surface and provide anti-aircraft
protection!'"
The navigator puts the megaphone to his mouth. From the other side
the message is acknowledged with a brief "Thanks!"
"Navigator, take a report: '06.15 hours. UXW hit by mine.' Tell the
radioman to try again. Perhaps we'll be in luck. Have him send this
message: 'Emergency. Emergency. UXW hit by mine. Unable to dive. All
systems inoperative. Request immediate escort. Remaining at point of
explosion--UA.'"
There's nothing left to do but wait and watch as it gets lighter.
"Seems to have bent their drive shaft," says the Old Man harshly.
"If it had been the diesels, the motors would still be good for
something, or _vice versa_."
I notice from the brightness behind us that the tide must have
turned us around: we now have the east at our back. We all look gray in
the pale morning light, as if smeared with ashes.
No engine noises, no motion, no vibration in the boat. We drift
along like flotsam. The fear . . . and the silence. I hardly dare clear
my throat. If only our diesel were running again--I'd give a lot to hear
the noise.
"Ship's time?"
"07.10 hours!"
Fear. We avoid looking at one another, as though to intercept a
glance would trigger a fatal explosion.
"Airplane! One hundred twenty degrees!"
"Ready anti-aircraft guns! Move it! Height?"
"Eight hundred! Looks like a Halifax!"
I disappear from the bridge, reach for ammunition, hand it on up.
Our anti-aircraft gun is already blazing away. We're giving it everything
we've got. But we're lying still. Playing target. Through the racket of
our gun I hear a great explosion. Then sudden silence.
I rush onto the bridge and look around. Where in god's name is the
other U-boat? Nothing but flat, opalescent sea. Only a couple of dark
blobs drifting off our port beam.
Our bow swings toward them. Finally the navigator says, "Direct
hit--just forward of the tower!"
I'm seeing things in a trance: a gray filter seems to have been
intruded in front of the camera. I squint, blink hard, stare: The boat
that was there a moment ago is gone. And the airplane? Disappeared. A
single bomb? A single pass? A direct hit?
They're coming back, I tell myself, and there'll be a swarm of
them. Fighter protection? Why don't we have any fighter protection? Fat
pig Goring--him and his big mouth! _Where are our airplanes?_
The sea is flat, polished. No motion--not so much as a wrinkle. A
knife-edge of horizon. And there, where the long hull of the boat was
lying a moment ago, more of these blobs, a disturbing fault in smooth
quicksilver. No whirlpool, no surge, nothing--no clatter of engines--
silence.
Why does no one scream? The stillness is absurd. Gives me the
feeling all this is unreal. Our bow has swung toward the drifting blobs.
In the glasses they resolve themselves into individual entities, heads
suspended in life jackets. The men manning our anti-aircraft gun are
still standing there like statues, expressionless, as though they haven't
yet grasped what has just happened. Only the heaving of their chests
betrays them.
Number One is waiting on the upper deck with five men, to take
aboard survivors.
"Goddammit--look out!" he roars.
On the starboard side the sea is red. Blood in salt water. What are
we to do with these wretched creatures?
I don't dare look too closely. Better to watch the sky.
Close behind me, someone says, "Probably they pictured Christmas
differently too!"
A man appears dripping on the bridge and stammers out some kind of
report, his hand on his forehead: the other Commander, Bremer.
His face--innocent as a choirboy's--is twisted; in spasm. He
actually howls. Stares straight ahead as if hypnotized. Clenches his
teeth to try to stop his lower jaw clicking like a castanet, but can't do
it. His whole body starts to tremble. A steady flood of tears runs down
his twitching cheeks.
The Old Man looks at him coldly, in silence. Finally he speaks.
"Why don't you go below!"
Bremer refuses with a violent shake of the head.
The Old Man issues an order. "Bring up the blankets!" And then, as
if in a sudden rage: "Move it! I want blankets up here. Now!"
As the first blanket is handed up through the tower hatch he
himself puts it around Bremer's shaking shoulders.
Not sufficient depth of water to dive; no boom-breaker; no
antiaircraft protection--what a fucking mess! This mirror-smooth sea. The
Halifax. What was that all about? Was it really carrying just one bomb? A
crate like that must carry a load of them.
"I felt--felt it--like a snake around my throat," Bremer goes on
stammering.
This strange figure on the bridge wrapped in a blanket; the
pathetic little handful of men on the upper deck; this silken, pastel
sea. A masquerade. I feel I have to break through a membrane if I'm to
reach reality.
"Look out!" yells a control-room assistant, heaving blankets
through the hatch behind him. Bremer twitches violently. He's standing in
the way.
He belongs to another flotilla, and none of our men know him.
The Old Man's voice is threatening to crack. He has to cough a
couple of times to stop the croaking.
"Diving's out."
Too shallow, too much current. So we'll just have to go on drifting
over the mines and wait till the Tommies come back. Still no fighter 
protection! But the other boat had been reported!--Nothing works right
any more. Fucking Hermann Goring.
Anchor? Wouldn't it be better for us to ride at anchor? Nothing
could be worse than letting the tide drag us over the mines.
The Old Man can't wait much longer. He has to decide now: to wait
for the Tommies or be like Blücher at Waterloo--just charge straight
ahead without boom-breaker or mine sweeper.
He screws up his face, the way he always does when he's thinking.
But now we actually get orders to the engine room and the helmsman.
Gradually the bow swings around toward the sun. Just as I thought:
charge!
I'm absolutely wrong. The Old Man orders the diesel run at slow
speed, just enough to hold the boat against the tide. We're running in
place.
The most beautiful of all mornings at sea. I don't know whether
it's the solemn grandeur of this Christmas morning or the misery on the
upper deck that brings tears to my eyes. A sob rises in my throat. I try
to choke it back. Mustn't let go.
If the sky had been dressed in mourning, in mist and darkness, the
scene of the shipwrecked men might have been easier to bear. But this
radiance of opal fire and gold that fills the sky and spreads out over
the water is in such agonizing contrast to the half-drowned sailors who
stand revealed on our upper deck that I want to cry out. They crowd
together, huddled like sheep, each man wrapped in a dark-gray blanket.
The morning light is too dazzling for me to pick out individual figures;
they form a single dark mass. Two of them still have their caps on. One,
a stringbean of a man, must be their First Watch Officer. The other is a
petty officer, probably their Number One. The engine-room crew certainly
didn't get out. That's the way it always goes. They seem to be barefoot.
One of them has rolled up his trousers as though he were planning to go
wading.
Our bosun and two of our men are trying to salvage an empty float.
He's already piled up six or seven bright-yellow life rafts against the
tower.
Apparently the Old Man won't take any of them below decks. There
isn't any point. After all, we can't dive here. And then there are still
the mines! Leave the poor beasts where they are.
It's high time the escort turned up. The enemy certainly isn't
going to be content with dropping a single bomb. The Halifax must have
reported, so the Tommies have known for some time that there's a second
boat sitting waiting for another bomb. Our fucking Navy! The people on
shore must have heard the explosion. Or have we no more forces at our
disposal in these coastal waters? Aren't there any more patrol boats? Are
we sheltering under the ass of the prophet?
Down there below the tower the radioman Herrmann, our orderly, and
two seamen are busy with the wounded. An older man from the other boat
was badly hit. Hands burned, head a ball of blood. Salt water on raw
flesh!--A shudder runs through me. I can hardly bear to look.
Herrmarin wraps the red head with gauze bandages, leaving only the
eyes and the mouth showing--like a Tuareg. Then he lights a cigarette and
puts it between the Tuareg's teeth. The Tuareg thanks him with a nod. The 
others are smoking too, some still sitting in their sodden clothes on the
wreckage of our grating.
The other boat's First Watch Officer and their petty officer can't
stop searching the skies, but their men seem indifferent. Two or three
even let the air out of their life jackets so that they can sit more
comfortably.
The Commander wants to know how many men have been rescued. I
count: twenty-three on the foredeck; four aft--all severely wounded. That
is barely more than half the crew.
How calm the sea is! Like unused metal foil. I've never seen it so
smooth. Not the slightest breath of wind.
Then the navigator calls, "Object at two hundred seventy degrees!"
All binoculars swing toward the magnet: a tiny dark spot floating
in the silky blue-gray. Impossible to make out what it is. I put down my
glasses and squint. The navigator climbs up on the TBT, leans back at an
angle, and raises his glasses again. Bremer--openmouthed--peers vaguely
in the direction indicated.
"Recognize anything?" Impatience in the Old Man's voice.
"No, Herr Kaleun! But that must be the place where she sank, given
the way the current's running now. It carried us quite a distance during
all that rescue work."
"Hm."
Another two or three minutes, then the Old Man suddenly decides to
have the bow turned about and to increase speed. We lay a course for the
tiny dot.
What's he up to, tearing around in these mine-infested waters on
account of a crate or an old oil barrel? Tempting fate? Hasn't he done
enough of that?
Five minutes pass. Then the navigator, who hasn't lowered his
glasses for so much as a second, says in an impassive voice: "Someone
swimming over there!"
"Thought so!" the Old Man answers, just as coolly.
Someone swimming! It must be nearly an hour since Bremer's boat
went down. We've been staring ourselves blind, all of us. And there was
nothing, nothing at all to disturb the mirrored perfection of the sea.
The Old Man orders more speed. I have my binoculars to my eyes, and
as we approach I too begin to make out the figure of a man. His head
shows clearly above the bulge of his life jacket. And now he's lifting an
arm.
The men on the upper deck have surged forward, until they are
clutching the net guard. Hope no one goes overboard at this point. My
heart is pounding. Someone really is moving out there! Our ace of a
navigator knew right away that it was no flotsam he was looking at.
I climb down the iron rungs on the outside of the tower to the
upper deck: I want to see the sailor they're about to pull out of the
drink. God, I want to cry, you ought to be throwing your arms around the
navigator's neck. That was one in a thousand. Only Kriechbaum could have
pulled off something like this. He never stops using his eyes--or his
head, for that matter.
Now they have him. Barefoot. Eighteen years old at most. Water
pouring off him. He leans against the tower but manages to keep to his
feet.
I nod encouragingly. Without saying a word. Now's not the time to
ask how he managed to work his way out of the sunken boat.
Must be a stoker. Probably the only one who got out of the
aftership. But why did it take so long? What went on? Who knows what his
story is.
Nevertheless, I say, "Man alive--lucky, weren't you?"
The youngster pants, then nods.
Number One appears with blankets. Never thought he could be so
tender: he wraps the boy up just like a mother. Jesus, he oughtn't to
have done that. The youngster collapses, begins to sob, his teeth
chattering.
"Hand over a cigarette," Number One orders one of our sailors.
"Come on, light it! And fast!"
Cautiously he lowers the boy onto the gratings, props his back
against the tower, and pushes the cigarette into his mouth. "Here, take
the butt. Go on, smoke it!"
"Ship's time?"
"08.10 hours!"
The escort was due at o8.oo. Cod!
My life jacket is beginning to bother me.
Lucky for the men on the upper deck that there's no wind and we
have this mild weather. Christmas Day--and not cold. The sun will soon be
up, but still we ought to see to it that they get something on their
feet, After all, we don't need our seaboots. Number One has already had
all available clothing carted up to them, sweaters especially.
I climb down to collect some footwear.
As I pass through the Officers' Mess I stop dead, thunderstruck.
The First Watch Officer has got his typewriter out and is about to start
pecking away. I'm speechless: This is too much! I snort disapprovingly,
but he doesn't even look up, lust jabs at the keys with his index finger
and keeps his stony seagull eyes fixed straight down. I would really love
to take his machine and beat him over the head with it. Instead of which
I merely say, "You're nuts," work my way farther forward and roar, "Get
going--move it, seaboots this way! Move it, man!"
What can he be pecking out right now? A report of our arrival? God
only knows. Perhaps it's a receipt for Bremer, a properly typed
acknowledgment that we've taken him aboard together with half his crew.
A chain is soon organized. The boots come up fast. I climb up after
the last pair.
A shout from Bremer's navigator. "The escort!" He points forward.
And there, for a fact, are smoke clouds rising over the horizon.
"Too late, gentlemen!" growls the Old Man.
Right next to my ear I hear a violent, staccato rattle. I turn my
head. My god, it's the other Commander. His teeth are chattering.
The sun comes up and the sea is iridescent taffeta. The blue
outline of the approaching boom-breaker and all her superstructures
stands out sharply against the red ball. Over the river mouth hang
swollen, misshapen clouds, shaded the subtle blue-gray of doves'
feathers. A broken mauve-red spreads across the sky, and the highest
clouds suddenly are bordered in brocade.
My eyes burn as I stare at the soaring disk of the sun. The Bible
Scholar's Salvation Army jingle echoes in my head.
Glorious, glorious that day,
When, no more sin, no more dismay,
We march into the Promised Land. . .
"Crazy the way things work out," says the Old Man--in an aside, so
Bremer won't hear him, "Now everything checks again: Only _one_ boat was
expected and only _one_ turns up."
He's been sizing up the boom-breaker. "Very pretty tub, a good
eight thousand tons. Only two small derricks. Where d'you suppose they
got them? . . . What in the world is that?" The last words are drawled
out on a rising note.
Now I see it too: ship after ship coming over the horizon behind
the boom-breaker.
"Gentlemen, you flatter us!" the Old Man says, to no one in
particular.
Then on the boom-breaker a sun beams out. "Call from boombreaker."
"Already noted, Second Watch Officer. Hurry up with the signal
lamp. Let's see what they want."
The searchlight goes out, flashes again. The Second Watch Officer
reads aloud: C-o-r-d-i-a-l-w-e-l-c-o-m-e.
"No doubt there's more to it than that!"
W-h-a-t-h-a-v-e-y-o-u-s-u-n-k.
"That's meant for you," the Commander says, turning to Bremer, who
has opted to remain below in the bridge cockpit and now looks shrunken in
contrast to the rest of us up here.
Bremer glances at us helplessly.
"Windbags," says the Second Watch Officer, his eyes fixed on the
boom-breaker. "Next thing we know they'll be sending us Christmas
greetings!"
"Oh the hell with it!" the Old Man says finally. "We'll simply
consider the question addressed to us. Get moving, signal them 'Two fat
freighters.'
The key of the signal lamp clicks. A few seconds' pause, then back
comes: H-e-a-r-t-y-c-o-n-g-r-a-t-u-l-a-t-i-o-n-s.
The Old Man makes a face and bites his lower lip.
"What do you think, shall we give them an explanation?" he asks the
navigator.
"Just keep going, Herr Kaleun. They'll soon notice who it is
they've brought in!"
If there are eyes behind those glasses, I think, they must have
seen the sailors on our upper deck long ago. This kind of makebelieve is
unusual in the U-boat service. And the rubber rafts our Number One made
such a neat pile of are hardly a usual feature of the upper decks of
returning boats. They _must_ be aware that something has been going on
here. And that it may begin again at any moment. The Tommies will be
back. They won't let us get off scot-free.
I try to calm down: In any case we'll soon be safe from the mines.
And if an airplane chooses to attack now, it'll encounter considerably
more fire power than two hours ago. The boom-breaker is well equipped
with anti-aircraft guns, and the horde of escort vessels now arriving
also have their own supply of popguns. But the Old Man doesn't seem to
find this much comfort. Again and again he scowls as he searches the sky,
which is gradually shading into blue.
"They always know when something's wrong," says the Second Watch
Officer, meaning the seagulls, which are circling the boat in flocks.
The gulls catch the golden light on their feathers and emit shrill,
plaintive cries. As they glide over us, they turn their heads searchingly
from side to side.
I have no ear for the orders to the engine room and the helmsman.
Hardly an eye for the approaching armada. I can't get over the way
they're spewing out smoke so brazenly: in front of them there's a great
thick wreath of it against the pastel background of the morning sky.
Perhaps they're trying to divert attention if the enemy appears again--to
concentrate it on themselves instead of us.
Once more I have my hands full, collecting and handing over a
steady supply of blankets and shoes. I finally become aware of a
fireboat, just as she arrives broad on our starboard beam. Her black
flanks are covered with rashes of red lead. Minutes later there's a dark
colossus to starboard. It's a dredge that works constantly around here to
keep a channel open for major shipping.
Now finally I can find time to pick up a pair of binoculars and
look out over our bow. The shore is still only a thin line, but there are
cranes there, as small as toys; I can also see individual figures on the
boom-breaker, which is now directly in front of us. And the course it's
holding is taking us straight toward the coast.
We have to wait in the outer basin. Our sailors ready the lines on
the upper deck, moving among the wounded with the utmost care.
A message from the signal tower. The navigator reads it out: "Enter
immediately!" Through our binoculars we see a bridge opening in front of
us. Already we can make out a crowd of people on the pier. Thank god, no
brass bands.
A few seagulls screech, and the sound is deafening in the strange
silence that descends as the boat creeps slowly between the mosscovered
walls of the channel. From the pier small bouquets of flowers with twigs
of fir tied around them are tossed down to us. No one picks them up.
The old revulsion against the people up there. I know that everyone
standing here on the bridge feels the same way. We're like irritable
animals, reacting violently to any false gesture.
Shrill whistling, a signal to the mooring crew on the upper deck.
The hawsers lie neatly coiled and ready, fore and aft. Likewise our thick
basket fenders.
Thin lines fly over to the pier, soldiers catch them and pull in
the heavy hawsers attached to the other end. Sailors come to their aid
and make fast the hawsers to the massive iron piles. The screws stir up
the brackish water as they slowly draw the boat in.
"Stop engine! Crew fall in on the afterdeck!" the Commander's voice
sounds hoarse.
The men up there can see our shattered upper deck, the shipwrecked
men huddled together like sheep, the wounded. I find myself looking into
horrified faces.
The gangway is pushed out. It slants sharply upward: We're united
once more with solid earth.
Even before I hear the buzz, I can feel it as part of the very air
I breathe: planes!
The sound is coming from the ocean: the swarm we've been expecting.
All heads are raised. The humming grows louder, deepens into a steady
thunder. Already the flak is cutting loose. There-- out over the sea--
tiny white clouds like wads of cotton hang in the sky. A flash of light:
the wing of a plane. Now I can see black dots: five--six bombers. Seven.
It's an armada!
A piercing snarl suddenly cuts into the furious barking of a fourbarrel anti-aircraft gun. Shadows flit across the storehouses. Things fly
apart.
The Old Man is shouting. "Quick, get out of here! Head for the
bunker!" His voice cracks.
Already a hail of bullets is tearing into the paving stones,
splintering them in all directions--pursuit planes!
They're not after us.
They're trying to silence the anti-aircraft posts. It's a combined
attack by fighters and bombers.
Here and there the pier explodes into fountains of rubble.
Fragments of stone sail through the air with a strange deliberation.
I'm still almost two hundred feet from the armored door of the
bunker, which the people inside have pulled shut, leaving the narrowest
possible entrance. I leap forward, my knees buckle again, I feel a sharp
pain in my thighs. Legs like wobbly stilts that I can't control. I seem
to have forgotten how to run.
Screams, little white puffs of cloud in the sky, howling sirens,
the rattle and snap of machine-gun fire, and the sudden barking of the
medium-sized flak, salvo after salvo crashing out in unending succession.
Every kind of explosion following its own rhythm in a single, appalling
cacophony. Smoke, mushrooms of dust, and in between the gray bodies of
aircraft. Which are ours, which are the Tommies'? I recognize a doubletailed Lightning, and high up a hornet swarm of bombers.
I hear the sharp yapping of light flak, the clatter of machine
guns, the chirping whine of splinters. Planes roar and scream. Farther
off, the heavy flak rumbles at them like some mighty earthquake. They're
coming in at every height.
In front of me is a grotesque ballet, choreographed by some madman
on a paved stage with the mammoth structure of the U-boat bunker as a
backdrop: figures throwing themselves to the ground, running zigzag,
dropping to their knees, whirling into the air, sweeping together in
tight formation, only to fly apart again, surging this way and that. One
man throws his arms into the air, spins in a pirouette, and sinks down in
a deep, court curtsy, his palms outstretched in reverence.
Again the roaring sweeps past. An invisible fist strikes me in the
back of the knees. Slammed down on the paving stones, I try convulsively
to make a word out of the only fragment in my brain: atro--atro. . .
Renewed howling. A blast of air pins me to the ground as plane after
plane roars over. Atrophy!
A bomber disintegrates in the sky. Fragments of wings tumble down.
The tail lands with a crash behind the bunker. I can hardly breathe for
dust and smoke. Arms flailing, I reach the concrete wall, squeeze through
the slit in the bunker door, fall over someone lying on the floor, hit my
forehead, roll to one side.
The rattle of gunfire sounds duller. I run my hand over my
forehead, am not surprised at the sticky feel of blood. The man beside me
is groaning and holding his stomach. As my eyes accustom themselves to 
the half-darkness I recognize him: gray oil-smeared clothes--must be from
our boat--Zeitler.
Someone takes me under the shoulders from behind and tries to lift
me to my feet.
"I'm all right, thanks!"
I stand up, stagger, eyes fogged, still supported by the man
behind. The fog clears. I can stand alone. Then there is an enormous boom
that almost shatters my eardrums. The whole bunker is one titanic,
reverberating drum. The floor shakes under me. From the roof above the
first of the flood docks--which I can just see into-- huge lumps of
concrete rain down, splash into the water, and pound the boat that's
lying at the pier. Suddenly a brilliant light breaks through a hole in
the bunker roof.
Light! I prop myself up.
The hole is a good ten feet by ten. Iron matting with thick lumps
of concrete caught in it is left hanging where the roof once was. The
matting moves, showering down more slabs of concrete.
The water in the dock continues to break against the piers. My god,
twenty-four feet of solid concrete blasted into nothing! It's never
happened before. Cries, orders. As much running about inside the bunker
as there was outside.
Bunker roofs were supposed to be safe against bombs of any size.
Where's all the steam coming from?
Outside, the furious shooting and rolling thunder continue
unabated, like some mighty, distant storm.
A huge cloud of dust settles. I have a furry taste on my tongue. No
more air. A racking cough. I have to lean against the wall, my head
resting on my forearm.
Air! All I want is air! I'm smothering. I force my way back to the
armored door through a solid wall of humanity, knock aside two shipyard
workers who try to bar my path, and push my way through the narrow
opening. Nothing but black, oily smoke: something must have scored a hit
on a fuel tank.
I'm wrong: The whole harbor basin is ablaze. Only the cranes rise
unmoved out of the billowing clouds of fiery smoke. There's a sharp
crackling and the wail of a steam siren that will not stop.
I look to the right, in the direction of the lock. The sky is
clearer here. I see torn warehouse roofs, houses bombed to piles of
rubble. Bent wires and jagged strips of iron tear at my feet. I almost
fall into .a crater that I failed to see in the smoke. A man lying
wounded raises himself up at me, madness in his eyes. Groans and whimpers
everywhere. There must be hundreds more like him, hidden by the dust and
smoke.
The boat! What has happened to the boat?
A gust of wind lifts the curtain of smoke. I climb through railings
bent into hoops, swerve around two dead men, run past ruins of redpainted
iron. A smoking pile of rocks slides into the water in front of me. God,
that was the pier! And the boat? Where is it? I suddenly see a slab of
steel towering out of the water like a gigantic plowshare--and attached
to it a net guard. The bow! Wooden debris bobs about in the water. Water?
It's oil! And the black lumps moving about in there: three--four--more--
are all human beings. These strange water creatures in among the bursting
bubbles must all be men from our boat. And the Old Man? What's happened
to him? A banner of smoke streams across the scene. Shouts from behind 
me: a long, ragged line of soldiers and dockworkers is heading my way.
Two trucks, sirens screaming, are racing toward me, swerving along
between the craters in a mad slalom.
And there in the haze I see the Old Man, streaming with blood, his
sweater and shirt torn to shreds. His eyes, which were always narrowed,
are wide, wide open. At almost the same moment we sink to our knees,
bracing our arms on the splintered stones, and face each other like two
Sumo wrestlers. The Old Man opens his mouth as though to let loose a
great shout. But all that gushes from his lips is blood.
